Project Gutenberg's Our Little Alaskan Cousin, by Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Our Little Alaskan Cousin

Author: Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

Release Date: August 1, 2013 [EBook #10224]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR LITTLE ALASKAN COUSIN ***




Produced by Emmy, Beth Baran, Juliet Sutherland, Mary
Meehan, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)







[Transcriber's Note: Bold text is surrounded by =equal signs= and italic
text is surrounded by _underscores_.]



Our Little Alaskan Cousin




THE

Little Cousin Series

(TRADE MARK)

    Each volume illustrated with six or more full-page plates in
    tint. Cloth, 12mo, with decorative cover,
    per volume, 60 cents


LIST OF TITLES

BY MARY HAZELTON WADE

(unless otherwise indicated)


    =Our Little African Cousin=
    =Our Little Alaskan Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Arabian Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Armenian Cousin=
    =Our Little Australian Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Brazilian Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Brown Cousin=
    =Our Little Canadian Cousin=
        By Elizabeth R. MacDonald
    =Our Little Chinese Cousin=
        By Isaac Taylor Headland
    =Our Little Cuban Cousin=
    =Our Little Dutch Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Egyptian Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little English Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Eskimo Cousin=
    =Our Little French Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little German Cousin=
    =Our Little Greek Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Hawaiian Cousin=
    =Our Little Hindu Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Indian Cousin=
    =Our Little Irish Cousin=
    =Our Little Italian Cousin=
    =Our Little Japanese Cousin=
    =Our Little Jewish Cousin=
    =Our Little Korean Cousin=
        By H. Lee M. Pike
    =Our Little Mexican Cousin=
        By Edward C. Butler
    =Our Little Norwegian Cousin=
    =Our Little Panama Cousin=
        By H. Lee M. Pike
    =Our Little Philippine Cousin=
    =Our Little Porto Rican Cousin=
    =Our Little Russian Cousin=
    =Our Little Scotch Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Siamese Cousin=
    =Our Little Spanish Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Swedish Cousin=
        By Claire M. Coburn
    =Our Little Swiss Cousin=
    =Our Little Turkish Cousin=

    L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    New England Building,     Boston, Mass.

[Illustration: "KALITAN FISHED DILIGENTLY BUT CAUGHT LITTLE."

(_See page 3_)]




    Our Little Alaskan
    Cousin

    By
    Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

    _Author of "Our Little Spanish Cousin," "With
    a Pessimist in Spain," "God, the
    King, My Brother," etc._

    _Illustrated_


    [Illustration]

    Boston
    L. C. Page & Company
    _PUBLISHERS_




    _Copyright, 1907_
    BY L. C. PAGE & COMPANY
    (INCORPORATED)

    _All rights reserved_

    Third Impression, May, 1909



    TO MY LITTLE SON
    John Nixon de Roulet




Preface


AWAY up toward the frozen north lies the great peninsula, which the
United States bought from the Russians, and thus became responsible for
the native peoples from whom the Russians had taken the land.

There are many kinds of people there, from Indians to Esquimos, and they
are under the American Government, yet they have no votes and are not
called American citizens.

It is about this country and its people that this little story is
written, and in the hope of interesting American girls and boys in these
very strange people, their Little Alaskan Cousins.




Contents


    CHAPTER                                PAGE
       I. KALITAN TENAS                       1
      II. AROUND THE CAMP-FIRE               12
     III. TO THE GLACIER                     26
      IV. TED MEETS MR. BRUIN                38
       V. A MONSTER OF THE DEEP              48
      VI. THE ISLAND HOME OF KALITAN         60
     VII. TWILIGHT TALES AND TOTEMS          71
    VIII. THE BERRY DANCE                    82
      IX. ON THE WAY TO NOME                 93
       X. IN THE GOLD COUNTRY               108
      XI. AFTERNOON TEA IN AN EGLU          119
     XII. THE SPLENDOUR OF SAGHALIE TYEE    129





List of Illustrations


                                               PAGE
    "KALITAN FISHED DILIGENTLY BUT CAUGHT
        LITTLE" (_See page 3_)        _Frontispiece_
    "AWAY WENT ANOTHER STINGING LANCE"           57
    "A GROUP OF PEOPLE AWAITING THE CANOES"      64
    MOUNT SHISHALDIN                             99
    "'LET'S WATCH THOSE TWO MEN. THEY HAVE
        EVIDENTLY STAKED A CLAIM TOGETHER'"     113
    "TWO FUNNY LITTLE LAPP BABIES HE TOOK
        TO RIDE ON A LARGE REINDEER"            134




Our Little Alaskan Cousin




CHAPTER I

KALITAN TENAS


IT was bitterly cold. Kalitan Tenas felt it more than he had in the long
winter, for then it was still and calm as night, and now the wind was
blowing straight in from the sea, and the river was frozen tight.

A month before, the ice had begun to break and he had thought the cold
was over, and that the all too short Alaskan summer was at hand. Now it
was the first of May, and just as he had begun to think of summer
pleasures, lo! a storm had come which seemed to freeze the very marrow
of his bones. However, our little Alaskan cousin was used to cold and
trained to it, and would not dream of fussing over a little snow-storm.

Kalitan started out to fish for his dinner, and though the snow came
down heavily and he had to break through the ice to make a fishing-hole,
and soon the ice was a wind-swept plain where even his own tracks were
covered with a white pall, he fished steadily on. He never dreamed of
stopping until he had fish enough for dinner, for, like most of his
tribe, he was persevering and industrious.

Kalitan was a Thlinkit, though, if you asked him, he would say he was
"Klinkit." This is a tribe which has puzzled wise people for a long
time, for the Thlinkits are not Esquimos, not Indians, not coloured
people, nor whites. They are the tribes living in Southeastern Alaska
and along the coast. Many think that a long, long time ago, they came
from Japan or some far Eastern country, for they look something like
the Japanese, and their language has many words similar to Japanese in
it.

Perhaps, long years ago, some shipwrecked Japanese were cast upon the
coast of Alaska, and, finding their boats destroyed and the land good to
live in, settled there, and thus began the Thlinkit tribes.

The Chilcats, Haidahs, and Tsimsheans are all Thlinkits, and are by far
the best of the brown people of the Northland. They are honest, simple,
and kind, and more intelligent than the Indians living farther north, in
the colder regions. The Thlinkit coast is washed by the warm current
from the Japan Sea, and it is not much colder than Chicago or Boston,
though the winter is a little longer.

Kalitan fished diligently but caught little. He was warmly clad in
sealskin; around his neck was a white bearskin ruff, as warm as toast,
and very pretty, too, as soft and fluffy as a lady's boa. On his feet
were moccasins of walrus hide. He had been perhaps an hour watching the
hole in the ice, and knelt there so still that he looked almost as
though he were frozen. Indeed, that was what those thought who saw him
there, for suddenly a dog-sledge came round the corner of the hill and a
loud halloo greeted his ears.

"Boston men," he said to himself as he watched them, "lost the trail."

They had indeed lost the trail, and Ted Strong had begun to think they
would never find it again.

Chetwoof, their Indian guide, had not talked very much about it, but
lapsed into his favourite "No understan'," a remark he always made when
he did not want to answer what was said to him.

Ted and his father were on their way from Sitka to the Copper River. Mr.
Strong was on the United States Geological Survey, which Ted knew meant
that he had to go all around the country and poke about all day among
rocks and mountains and glaciers. He had come with his father to this
far Alaskan clime in the happiest expectation of adventures with bears
and Indians, always dear to the heart of a boy.

He was pretty tired of the sledge, having been in it since early
morning, and he was cold and hungry besides; so he was delighted when
the dogs stopped and his father said:

"Hop out, son, and stretch your legs. We'll try to find out where we are
before we go any farther."

Chetwoof meanwhile was interviewing the boy, who came quickly toward
them.

"Who are you?" demanded Chetwoof.

"Kalitan Tenas," was the brief reply.

"Where are we?" was the next question.

"Near to Pilchickamin River."

"Where is a camp?"

"There," said the boy, pointing toward a clump of pine-trees. "Ours."

Ted by this time was tired of his own unwonted silence, and he came up
to Kalitan, holding out his hand.

"My name is Ted Strong," he said, genially, grinning cheerfully at the
young Alaskan. "I say this is a jolly place. I wish you would teach me
to fish in a snow-hole. It must be great fun. I like you; let's be
friends!" Kalitan took the boy's hand in his own rough one.

"Mahsie" (thank you), he said, a sudden quick smile sweeping his dark
face like a fleeting sunbeam, but disappearing as quickly, leaving it
grave again. "Olo?" (hungry).

"Yes," said Mr. Strong, "hungry and cold."

"Camp," said Kalitan, preparing to lead the way, with the hospitality of
his tribe, for the Thlinkits are always ready to share food and fire
with any stranger. The two boys strode off together, and Mr. Strong
could scarcely help smiling at the contrast between them.

Ted was the taller, but slim even in the furs which almost smothered
him, leaving only his bright face exposed to the wind and weather. His
hair was a tangle of yellow curls which no parting could ever affect,
for it stood straight up from his forehead like a golden fleece; his
mother called it his aureole. His skin was fair as a girl's, and his
eyes as big and blue as a young Viking's; but the Indian boy's locks
were black as ink, his skin was swarthy, his eyes small and dark, and
his features that strange mixture of the Indian, the Esquimo, and the
Japanese which we often see in the best of our Alaskan cousins.

Boys, however, are boys all the world over, and friendly animals, and
Ted was soon chattering away to his newly found friend as if he had
known him all his life.

"What's your name?" he asked.

"Kalitan," was the answer. "They call me Kalitan Tenas;[1] my father was
Tyee."

"Where is he?" asked Ted. He wanted to see an Indian chief.

"Dead," said Kalitan, briefly.

"I'm sorry," said Ted. He adored his own father, and felt it was hard on
a boy not to have one.

"He was killed," said Kalitan, "but we had blood-money from them," he
added, sternly.

"What's that?" asked Ted, curiously.

"Long time ago, when one man kill another, his clan must pay
with a life. One must be found from his tribe to cry,
'O-o-o-o-o-a-ha-a-ich-klu-kuk-ich-klu-kuk'" (ready to die, ready to
die). His voice wailed out the mournful chant, which was weird and
solemn and almost made Ted shiver. "But now," the boy went on, "Boston
men" (Americans) "do not like the blood-tax, so the murderer pays money
instead. We got many blankets and baskets and moneys for Kalitan Tyee.
He great chief."

"Do you live here?" asked Ted.

"No, live on island out there." Kalitan waved his hand seaward. "Come to
fish with my uncle, Klake Tyee. This good fishing-ground."

"It's a pretty fine country," said Ted, glancing at the scene, which
bore charm to other than boyish eyes. To the east were the mountains
sheltering a valley through which the frozen river wound like a silver
ribbon, widening toward the sea. A cold green glacier filled the valley
between two mountains with its peaks of beauty. Toward the shore, which
swept in toward the river's mouth in a sheltered cove, were clumps of
trees, giant fir, aspen, and hemlock, green and beautiful, while seaward
swept the waves in white-capped loveliness.

Kalitan ushered them to the camp with great politeness and considerable
pride.

"You've a good place to camp," said Mr. Strong, "and we will gladly
share your fire until we are warm enough to go on."

Ted's face fell. "Must we go right away?" he asked. "This is such a
jolly place."

"No go to-day," said Kalitan, briefly, to Chetwoof. "_Colesnass._"[2]

"Huh!" said Chetwoof. "Think some."

"Here comes my uncle," said Kalitan, and he ran eagerly to meet an old
Indian who came toward the camp from the shore. He eagerly explained the
situation to the Tyee, who welcomed the strangers with grave politeness.
He was an old man, with a seamed, scarred face, but kindly eyes. Chief
of the Thlinkits, his tribe was scattered, his children dead, and
Kalitan about all left to him of interest in life.

"There will be more snow," he said to Mr. Strong. "You are welcome. Stay
and share our fire and food."

"Do let us stay, father," cried Ted, and his father smiled indulgently,
but Kalitan looked at him in astonishment. Alaskan boys are taught to
hold their tongues and let their elders decide matters, and Kalitan
would never have dreamed of teasing for anything.

But Mr. Strong did not wish to face another snow-storm in the sledge,
and knew he could work but little till the storm was passed; so he
readily consented to stay a few days and let Ted see some real Alaskan
hunting and fishing.

Both boys were delighted, and soon had the camp rearranged to
accommodate the strangers. The fire was built up, Ted and Kalitan
gathering cones and fir branches, which made a fragrant blaze, while
Chetwoof cared for the dogs, and the old chief helped Mr. Strong pitch
his tent in the lee of some fragrant firs. Soon all was prepared and
supper cooking over the coals,--a supper of fresh fish and seal fat,
which Alaskans consider a great delicacy, and to which Mr. Strong added
coffee and crackers from his stores,--and Indians and whites ate
together in friendliness and amity.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Little Arrow.

[2] Snow.




CHAPTER II

AROUND THE CAMP-FIRE


"HOW does it happen that you speak English, Kalitan?" asked Mr. Strong
as they sat around the camp-fire that evening. The snow had continued
during the afternoon, and the boys had had an exciting time coasting and
snow-balling and enjoying themselves generally.

"I went for a few months to the Mission School at Wrangel," said
Kalitan. "I learned much there. They teach the boys to read and write
and do sums and to work the ground besides. They learn much more than
the girls."

"Huh!" said the old chief, grimly. "Girls learn too much. They no good
for Indian wives, and white men not marry them. Best for girls to stay
at home at the will of their fathers until they get husbands."

"So you've been in Wrangel," said Ted to Kalitan. "We went there, too.
It's a dandy place. Do you remember the fringe of white mountains back
of the harbour? The people said the woods were full of game, but we
didn't have time to go hunting. There are a few shops there, but it
seemed to me a very small place to have been built since 1834. In the
States whole towns grow up in two or three weeks."

"Huh!" said Kalitan, with a quick shrug of his shoulders, "quick grow,
sun fade and wind blow down."

"I don't think the sun could ever fade in Wrangel," laughed Ted. "They
told me there it hadn't shone but fifteen days in three months. It
rained all the time."

"Rain is nothing," said Kalitan. "It is when the Ice Spirit speaks in
the North Wind's roar and in the crackling of the floes that we
tremble. The glaciers are the children of the Mountain Spirit whom our
fathers worshipped. He is angry, and lo! he hurls down icebergs in his
wrath, he tosses them about, upon the streams he tosses the _kyaks_ like
feathers and washes the land with the waves of Sitth. When our people
are buried in the ground instead of being burnt with the fire, they must
go for ever to the place of Sitth, of everlasting cold, where never sun
abides, nor rain, nor warmth."

Ted had listened spellbound to this poetic speech and gazed at Kalitan
in open-mouthed amazement. A boy who could talk like that was a new and
delightful playmate, and he said:

"Tell me more about things, Kalitan," but the Indian was silent, ashamed
of having spoken.

"What do you do all day when you are at home?" persisted the American.

"In winter there is nothing to do but to hunt and fish," said Kalitan.
"Sometimes we do not find much game, then we think of how, when a
Thlinkit dies, he has plenty. If he has lived as a good tribesman, his
kyak glides smoothly over the silver waters into the sunset, until, o'er
gently flowing currents, it reaches the place of the mighty forest. A
bad warrior's canoe passes dark whirlpools and terrible rapids until he
reaches the place we speak not of, where reigns Sitth.

"In the summer-time we still hunt and fish. Many have learned to till
the ground, and we gather berries and wood for the winter. The other
side of the inlet, the tree-trunks drift from the Yukon and are stranded
on the islands, so there is plenty for firewood. But upon our island the
women gather a vine and dry it. They collect seaweed for food in the
early spring, and dry it and press it into square cakes, which make good
food after they have hung long in the sun. They make baskets and sell
them to the white people. Often my uncle and I take them to Valdez, and
once we brought back fifty dollars for those my mother made. There is
always much to do."

"Don't you get terribly cold hunting in the winter?" asked Ted.

"Thlinkit boy not a baby," said Kalitan, a trifle scornfully. "We begin
to be hardened when we are babies. When I was five years old, I left my
father and went to my uncle to be taught. Every morning I bathed in the
ocean, even if I had to break ice to find water, and then I rolled in
the snow. After that my uncle brushed me with a switch bundle, and not
lightly, for his arm is strong. I must not cry out, no matter if he
hurt, for a chief's son must never show pain nor fear. That would give
his people shame."

"Don't you get sick?" asked Ted, who felt cold all over at the idea of
being treated in such a heroic manner.

"The _Kooshta_[3] comes sometimes," said Kalitan. "The Shaman[4] used to
cast him out, but now the white doctor can do it, unless the _kooshta_
is too strong."

Ted was puzzled as to Kalitan's exact meaning, but did not like to ask
too many questions for fear of being impolite, so he only said:

"Being sick is not very nice, anyhow."

"To be bewitched is the most terrible," said Kalitan, gravely.

"How does that happen?" asked Ted, eagerly, but Kalitan shook his head.

"It is not good to hear," he said. "The medicine-man must come with his
drum and rattle, and he is very terrible. If the white men will not
allow any more the punishing of the witches, they should send more of
the white medicine-men, if we are not to have any more of our own."

"Boys should not talk about big things," said the old chief suddenly. He
had been sitting quietly over the fire, and spoke so suddenly that
Kalitan collapsed into silence. Ted, too, quieted down at the old
chief's stern voice and manner, and both boys sat and listened to the
men talking, while the snow still swirled about them.

Tyee Klake told Mr. Strong many interesting things about the coast
country, and gave him valuable information as to the route he should
pursue in his search for interesting things in the mountains.

"It will be two weeks before the snow will break so you can travel in
comfort," he said. "Camp with us. We remain here one week, then we go to
the island. We can take you there, you will see many things, and your
boy will hunt with Kalitan."

"Where is your island?" asked Mr. Strong.

Ted said nothing, but his eyes were fixed eagerly upon his father. It
was easy to see that he wished to accept the invitation.

"Out there." Tyee Klake pointed toward where the white coast-line seemed
to fade into silvery blue.

"There are many islands; on some lives no one, but we have a village.
Soon it will be nearly deserted, for many of our people rove during the
summer, and wander from one camping-ground to another, seeking the best
game or fish. But Kalitan's people remain always on the island. Him I
take with me to hunt the whale and seal, to gather the berries, and to
trap the little animals who bear fur. We find even seal upon our shores,
though fewer since your people have come among us."

"Which were the best, Russians or Americans?" asked Mr. Strong, curious
to see what the old Indian would say, but the Tyee was not to be caught
napping.

"Men all alike," he said. "Thlinkit, Russian, American, some good, some
bad. Russians used Indians more, gave them hunting and fishing, and only
took part of the skins. Americans like to hunt and fish all themselves
and leave nothing for the Indians. Russians teach _quass_, Americans
teach whiskey. Before white men came, Indians were healthy. They ate
fish, game, berries; now they must have other foods, and they are not
good for Indians here,"--he touched his stomach. "Indian used to dress
in skins and furs, now he must copy white man and shiver with cold. He
soon has the coughing sickness and then he goes into the unknown.

"But the government of the Americans is best because it tries to do some
things for the Indian. It teaches our boys useful things in the
schools, and, if some of its people are bad, some Indians are bad, too.
Men all alike," he repeated with the calm stoicism of his race.

"The government is far away," said Mr. Strong, "and should not be blamed
for the doings of all its servants. I should like to see this island
home of yours, and think we must accept your invitation; shall we, Ted?"
he smiled at the boy.

"Yes, indeed; thank you, sir," said Ted, and he and Kalitan grinned at
each other happily.

"We shall stay in camp until the blue jay comes," said the old chief,
smiling, "and then seek the village of my people."

"What does the blue jay mean?" asked Ted, timidly, for he was very much
in awe of this grave old man.

Kalitan said something in Thlinkit to his uncle, and the old chief,
looking kindly at the boy, replied with a nod:

"I will tell you the story of the blue jay," he said.

"My story is of the far, far north. Beside a salmon stream there dwelt
people rich in slaves. These caught and dried the salmon for the winter,
and nothing is better to eat than dried salmon dipped in seal oil. All
the fish were caught and stored away, when lo! the whiteness fell from
heaven and the snows were upon them. It was the time of snow and they
should not have complained, but the chief was evil and he cursed the
whiteness. No one should dare to speak evil of the Snow Spirit, which
comes from the Unknown! Deeper and deeper grew the snow. It flew like
feathers about the _eglu_,[5] and the slaves had many troubles in
putting in limbs for the fire. Then the snow came in flakes so large
they seemed like the wings of birds, and the house was covered, and they
could no longer keep their _kyaks_ on top of the snow. All were shut
tight in the house, and their fire and food ran low. They knew not how
many days they were shut in, for there was no way to tell the day from
night, only they knew they were sore hungry and that the Snow Spirit was
angry and terrible in his anger.

"But each one spoke not; he only chose a place where he should lie down
and die when he could bear no more.

"Only the chief spoke, and he once. 'Snow Spirit,' he said aloud, 'I
alone am evil. These are not so. Slay me and spare!' But the Snow Spirit
answered not, only the wind screamed around the _eglu_, and his screams
were terrible and sad. Then hope left the heart of the chief and he
prepared to die with all his people and all his slaves.

"But on the day when their last bit of food was gone, lo! something
pecked at the top of the smoke-hole, and it sang 'Nuck-tee,' and it was
a blue jay. The chief heard and saw and wondered, and, looking 'neath
the smoke-hole, he saw a scarlet something upon the floor. Picking it
up, he found it was a bunch of Indian tomato berries, red and ripe, and
quickly hope sprang in his breast.

"'Somewhere is summer,' he cried. 'Let us up and away.'

"Then the slaves hastened to dig out the canoe, and they drew it with
mighty labour, for they were weak from fasting, over the snows to the
shore, and there they launched it without sail or paddle, with all the
people rejoicing. And after a time the wind carried them to a beach
where all was summer. Birds sang, flowers bloomed, and berries gleamed
scarlet in the sun, and there were salmon jumping in the blue water.
They ate and were satisfied, for it was summer on the earth and summer
in their hearts.

"That is how the Thlinkits came to our island, and so we say when the
snow breaks, that now comes the blue jay."

"Thank you for telling us such a dandy story," cried Ted, who had not
lost a word of this quaint tale, told so graphically over the camp-fire
of the old chief Klake.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] Kooshta, a spirit in animal's form which inhabits the body of sick
persons and must be cast out, according to Thlinkit belief.

[4] Shaman, native medicine-man.

[5] Hut.




CHAPTER III

TO THE GLACIER


TED slept soundly all night, wrapped in the bearskins from the sledge,
in the little tent he shared with his father. When the morning broke, he
sprang to his feet and hurried out of doors, hopeful for the day's
pleasures. The snow had stopped, but the ground was covered with a thick
white pall, and the mountains were turned to rose colour in the morning
sun, which was rising in a blaze of glory.

"Good morning, Kalitan," shouted Ted to his Indian friend, whom he spied
heaping wood upon the camp-fire. "Isn't it dandy? What can we do
to-day?"

"Have breakfast," said Kalitan, briefly. "Then do what Tyee says."

"Well, I hope he'll say something exciting," said Ted.

"Think good day to hunt," said Kalitan, as he prepared things for the
morning meal.

"Where did you get the fish?" asked Ted.

"Broke ice-hole and fished when I got up," said the Thlinkit.

"You don't mean you have been fishing already," exclaimed the lazy Ted,
and Kalitan smiled as he said:

"White people like fish. Tyee said: 'Catch fish for Boston men's
breakfast,' and I go."

"Do you always mind him like that?" asked Ted. He generally obeyed his
father, but there were times when he wasn't anxious to and argued a
little about it. Kalitan looked at him in astonishment.

"He chief!" he said, simply.

"What will we do with the camp if we all go hunting?" asked Ted.

"Nothing," said Kalitan.

"Leave Chetwoof to watch, I suppose," continued Ted.

"Watch? Why?" asked Kalitan.

"Why, everything; some one will steal our things," said Ted.

"Thlinkits not steal," said Kalitan, with dignity. "Maybe white man come
along and steal from his brothers; Indians not. If we go away to long
hunt, we _cache_ blankets and no one would touch."

"What do you mean by _cache_?" asked Ted.

"We build a mound hut near the house, and put there the blankets and
stores. Sometime they stay there for years, but no one would take from a
_cache_. If one has plenty of wood by the seashore or in the forest, he
may cord it and go his way and no one will touch it. A deer hangs on a
tree where dogs may not reach it, but no stray hunter would slice even a
piece. We are not thieves."

"It is a pity you could not send missionaries to the States, you
Thlinkits, my boy," said Mr. Strong, who had come up in time to hear
Kalitan's words. "I'm afraid white people are less honest."

"Teddy, do you know we are to have some hunting to-day, and that you'll
get your first experience with a glacier."

"Hurrah," shouted Ted, dancing up and down in excitement.

"Tyee Klake says we can hunt toward the base of the glacier, and I shall
try to go a little ways upon it and see how the land lies, or, rather,
the ice. It is getting warmer, and, if it continues a few days, the snow
will melt enough to let us go over to that island you are so anxious to
see."

Ted's eyes shone, and the amount of breakfast he put away quite prepared
him for his day's work, which, pleasant though it might be, certainly
was hard work. The chief said they must seek the glacier first before
the sun got hot, for it was blinding on the snow. So they set out soon
after breakfast, leaving Chetwoof in charge of the camp, and with orders
to catch enough fish for dinner.

"We'll be ready to eat them, heads and tails," said Ted, and his father
added, laughingly:

"'Bible, bones, and hymn-book, too.'"

"What does that mean?" asked Ted, as Kalitan looked up inquiringly.

"Once a writer named Macaulay said he could make a rhyme for any word in
the English language, and a man replied, 'You can't rhyme Timbuctoo.'
But he answered without a pause:

    "If I were a Cassowary
     On the plains of Timbuctoo,
     I'd eat up a missionary,
     Bible, bones, and hymn-book, too."

Ted laughed, but Kalitan said, grimly:

"Not good to eat Boston missionary, he all skin and bone!"

"Where did they get the name Alaska?" asked Ted, as they tramped over
the snow toward the glacier.

"Al-ay-ck-sa--great country," said Kalitan.

"It certainly is," said Ted. "It's fine! I never saw anything like this
at home," pointing as he spoke to the scene in front of him.

A group of evergreen trees, firs and the Alaska spruce, so useful for
fires and torches, fringed the edge of the ice-field, green and verdant
in contrast to the gleaming snows of the mountain, which rose in a
gentle slope at first, then precipitously, in a dazzling and enchanting
combination of colour. It was as if some marble palace of old rose
before them against the heavens, for the ice was cut and serrated into
spires and gables, turrets and towers, all seeming to be ornamented with
fretwork where the sun's rays struck the peaks and turned them into
silver and gold. Lower down the ice looked like animals, so twisted was
it into fantastic shapes; fierce sea monsters with yawning mouths
seeming ready to devour; bears and wolves, whales, gigantic elephants,
and snowy tigers, tropic beasts looking strangely out of place in this
arctic clime.

Deep crevices cut the ice-fields, and in their green-blue depths lurked
death, for the least misstep would dash the traveller into an abyss
which had no bottom. Beyond the glacier itself, the snow-capped
mountains rose grand and serene, their glittering peaks clear against
the blue sky, which hue the glacier reflected and played with in a
thousand glinting shades, from purpling amethyst to lapis lazuli and
turquoise.

As they gazed spellbound, a strange thing occurred, a thing of such
wonder and beauty that Ted could but grasp his father's arm in silence.

Suddenly the peaks seemed to melt away, the white ice-pinnacles became
real turrets, houses and cathedrals appeared, and before them arose a
wonderful city of white marble, dream-like and shadowy, but beautiful as
Aladdin's palace in the "Arabian Nights." At last Ted could keep silent
no longer.

"What is it?" he cried, and the old chief answered, gravely:

"The City of the Dead," but his father said:

"A mirage, my boy. They are often seen in these regions, but you are
fortunate in seeing one of the finest I have ever witnessed."

"What is a mirage?" demanded Ted.

"An optical delusion," said his father, "and one I am sure I couldn't
explain so that you would understand it. The queer thing about a mirage
is that you usually see the very thing most unlikely to be found in that
particular locality. In the Sahara, men see flowers and trees and
fountains, and here on this glacier we see a splendid city."

"It certainly is queer. What makes glaciers, daddy?" Ted was even more
interested than usual in his father's talk because of Kalitan, whose
dark eyes never left Mr. Strong's face, and who seemed to drink in every
word of information as eagerly as a thirsty bird drinks water.

"The dictionaries tell you that glaciers are fields of ice, or snow and
ice, formed in the regions of perpetual snow, and moving slowly down the
mountain slopes or valleys. Many people say the glaciers are the fathers
of the icebergs which float at sea, and that these are broken off the
glacial stream, but others deny this. When the glacial ice and snow
reaches a point where the air is so warm that the ice melts as fast as
it is pushed down from above, the glacier ends and a river begins. These
are the finest glaciers in the world, except, perhaps, those of the
Himalayas.

"This bids fair to be a wonderfully interesting place for my work, Ted,
and I'm glad you're likely to be satisfied with your new friends, for I
shall have to go to many places and do a lot of things less interesting
than the things Kalitan can show you.

"See these blocks of fine marble and those superb masses of porphyry and
chalcedony,--but there's something which will interest you more. Take my
gun and see if you can't bring down a bird for supper."

Wild ducks were flying low across the edge of the glacier and quite near
to the boys, and Ted grasped his father's gun in wild excitement. He was
never allowed to touch a gun at home. Dearly as he loved his mother, it
had always seemed very strange to him that she should show such poor
taste about firearms, and refuse to let him have any; and now that he
had a gun really in his hands, he could hardly hold it, he was so
excited. Of course it was not the first time, for his father had allowed
him to practise shooting at a mark ever since they had reached Alaska,
but this was the first time he had tried to shoot a living target. He
selected his duck, aimed quickly, and fired. Bang! Off went the gun,
and, wonder of wonders! two ducks fell instead of one.

"Well done, Ted, that duck was twins," cried his father, laughing,
almost as excited as the boy himself, and they ran to pick up the birds.
Kalitan smiled, too, and quietly picked up one, saying:

"This one Kalitan's," showing, as he spoke, his arrow through the bird's
side, for he had discharged an arrow as Ted fired his gun.

"Too bad, Ted. I thought you were a mighty hunter, a Nimrod who killed
two birds with one stone," said Mr. Strong, but Ted laughed and said:

"So I got the one I shot at, I don't care."

They had wild duck at supper that night, for Chetwoof plucked the birds
and roasted them on a hot stone over the spruce logs, and Ted, tired and
wet and hungry, thought he had never tasted such a delicious meal in his
life.




CHAPTER IV

TED MEETS MR. BRUIN


IT seemed to Ted as if he had scarcely touched the pillow on the nights
which followed before it was daylight, and he would awake to find the
sun streaming in at his tent flap. He always meant to go fishing with
Kalitan before breakfast, so the moment he woke up he jumped out of bed,
if his pile of fragrant pine boughs covered with skins could be called a
bed, and hurried through his toilet. Quick as he tried to be, however,
he was never ready before Kalitan, for, when Ted appeared, the Indian
boy had always had his roll in the snow and was preparing his lines.

Kalitan was perfectly fascinated with the American boy. He thought him
the most wonderful specimen of a boy that he had ever seen. He knew so
much that Kalitan did not, and talked so brightly that being with Ted
was to the Indian like having a book without the bother of reading.
There were some things about him that Kalitan could not understand, to
be sure. Ted talked to his father just as if he were another boy. He
even spoke to Tyee Klake on occasions when that august personage had not
only not asked him a question, but was not speaking at all. From the
Thlinkit point of view, this was a most remarkable performance on Ted's
part, but Kalitan thought it must be all right for a "Boston boy," for
even the stern old chief seemed to regard happy-go-lucky Ted with
approval.

Ted, on the other hand, thought Kalitan the most remarkable boy he had
ever met in all his life. He had not been much with boys. His "Lady
Mother," as he always called the gentle, brown-eyed being who ruled his
father and himself, had not cared to have her little Galahad mingle
with the rougher city boys who thronged the streets, and had kept him
with herself a great deal. Ted had loved books, and he and his little
sister Judith had lived in a pleasant atmosphere of refinement, playing
happily together until the boy had grown almost to dread anything common
or low. His mother knew he had moral courage, and would face any issue
pluckily, but his father feared he would grow up a milksop, and thought
he needed hardening.

Mrs. Strong objected to the hardening process if it consisted in turning
her boy loose to learn the ways of the city streets, but had consented
to his going with his father, urged thereto by fears for his health,
which was not of the best, and the knowledge that he had reached the
"bear and Indian" age, and it was certainly a good thing for him to have
his experiences first-hand.

To Ted the whole thing was perfectly delightful. When he lay down at
night, he would often like to see "Mother and Ju," but he was generally
so tired that he was asleep before he had time to think enough to be
really homesick. During the day there was too much doing to have any
thinking time, and, since he had met this boy friend, he thought of
little else but him and what they were to do next. The Tyee had assured
Mr. Strong that it was perfectly safe for the boys to go about together.

"Kalitan knows all the trails," he said. "He take care of white brother.
Anything come, call Chetwoof."

As Mr. Strong was very anxious to penetrate the glacier under Klake's
guidance, and wanted Ted to enjoy himself to the full, he left the boys
to themselves, the only stipulation being that they should not go on the
water without Chetwoof.

There seemed to be always something new to do. As the days grew warmer,
the ice broke in the river, and the boys tramped all over the country.
Ted learned to use the bow and arrow, and brought down many a bird for
supper, and proud he was when he served up for his father a wild duck,
shot, plucked, and cooked all by himself.

They fished in the stream by day and set lines by night. They trapped
rabbits and hares in the woods, and one day even got a silver fox, a
skin greatly prized by the fur traders on account of its rarity. Kalitan
insisted that Ted should have it, though he could have gotten forty
dollars for it from a white trader, and Ted was rejoiced at the idea of
taking it home to make a set of furs for Judith.

One day Ted had a strange experience, and not a very pleasant one, which
might have been very serious had it not been for Kalitan. He had noticed
a queer-looking plant on the river-bank the day before, and had stopped
to pick it up, when he received such a sudden and unexpected pricking
as to cause him to jump back and shout for Kalitan. His hand felt as if
it had been pierced by a thousand needles, and he flew to a snow-bank to
rub it with snow.

"I must have gotten hold of some kind of a cactus," he said to Kalitan,
who only replied:

"Huh! picked hedgehog," as he pointed to where Ted's cactus was ambling
indignantly away with every quill rattling and set straight out in anger
at having his morning nap disturbed. Kalitan wrapped Ted's hand in soft
mud, which took the pain out, but he couldn't use it much for the next
few days, and did not feel eager to hunt when his father and the Tyee
started out in the morning. Kalitan remained with him, although his eyes
looked wistful, for he had heard the chief talk about bear tracks having
been seen the day before. Bears were quite a rarity, but sometimes an
old cinnamon or even a big black bruin would venture down in search of
fresh fish, which he would catch cleverly with his great paws.

Kalitan and Ted fished awhile, and then Ted wandered away a little,
wondering what lay around a point of rock which he had never yet
explored. Something lay there which he had by no means expected to see,
and he scarcely knew what to make of it. On the river-bank, close to the
edge of the stream, was a black figure, an Indian fishing, as he
supposed, and he paused to watch. The fisherman was covered with fur
from head to foot, and, as Ted watched him, he seemed to have no line or
rod. Going nearer, the boy grew even more puzzled, and, though the man's
back was toward him, he could easily see that there was something
unusual about the figure. Just as he was within hailing distance and
about to shout, the figure made a quick dive toward the water and sprang
back again with a fish between his paws, and Ted saw that it was a huge
bear. He gave a sharp cry and then stood stock-still. The creature
looked around and stood gnawing his fish and staring at Ted as stupidly
as the boy stared at him. Then Ted heard a halloo behind him and
Kalitan's voice:

"Run for Chetwoof, quick!"

Ted obeyed as the animal started to move off. He ran toward the camp,
hearing the report of Kalitan's gun as he ran. Chetwoof, hearing the
noise, hurried out, and it was but a few moments before he was at
Kalitan's side. To Ted it seemed like a day before he could get back and
see what was happening, but he arrived on the scene in time to see
Chetwoof despatch the animal.

"Hurrah!" cried Ted. "You've killed a bear," but Chetwoof only grunted
crossly.

"Very bad luck!" he said, and Kalitan explained:

"Indians don't like to kill bears or ravens. Spirits in them, maybe
ancestors."

Ted looked at him in great astonishment, but Kalitan explained:

"Once, long ago, a Thlinkit girl laughed at a bear track in the snow and
said: 'Ugly animal must have made that track!' But a bear heard and was
angry. He seized the maiden and bore her to his den, and turned her into
a bear, and she dwelt with him, until one day her brother killed the
bear and she was freed. And from that day Thlinkits speak respectfully
of bears, and do not try to kill them, for they know not whether it is a
bear or a friend who hides within the shaggy skin."

The Tyee and Mr. Strong were greatly surprised when they came home to
see the huge carcass of Mr. Bruin, and they listened to the account of
Kalitan's bravery. The old chief said little, but he looked approvingly
at Kalitan, and said "Hyas kloshe" (very good), which unwonted praise
made the boy's face glow with pleasure. They had a great discussion as
to whom the bear really belonged. Ted had found him, Kalitan had shot
him first, and Chetwoof had killed him, so they decided to go shares.
Ted wanted the skin to take home, and thought it would make a splendid
rug for his mother's library, so his father paid Kalitan and Chetwoof
what each would have received as their share had the skin been sold to a
trader, and they all had bear meat for supper. Ted thought it finer than
any beefsteak he had ever eaten, and over it Kalitan smacked his lips
audibly.




CHAPTER V

A MONSTER OF THE DEEP


THE big bear occupied considerable attention for several days. He had to
be carefully skinned and part of the meat dried for future use. Alaskans
never use salt for preserving meat. Indeed they seem to dislike salt
very much. It had taken Ted some time to learn to eat all his meat and
fish quite fresh, without a taste of salt, but he had grown to like it.
There is something in the sun and wind of Alaska which cures meat
perfectly, and the bear's meat was strung on sticks and dried in the sun
so that they might enjoy it for a long time.

It seemed as if the adventure with Bruin was enough to last the boys for
several days, for Ted's hand still pained him from the porcupine's
quills, and he felt tired and lazy. He lay by the camp-fire one
afternoon listening to Kalitan's tales of his island home, when his
father came in from a long tramp, and, looking at him a little
anxiously, asked:

"What's the matter, son?"

"Nothing, I'm only tired," said Ted, but Kalitan said:

"Porcupine quills poison hand. Well in a few days."

"So your live cactus is getting in his work, is he? I'm glad it wasn't
the bear you mistook for an Alaskan posy and tried to pick. I'm tired
myself," and Mr. Strong threw himself down to rest.

"Daddy, how did we come to have Alaska, anyway?"

"Well, that's a long story," said his father, "but an interesting one."

"Do tell us about it," urged Ted. "I know we bought it, but what did we
pay the Indians for it? I shouldn't have thought they'd have sold such a
fine country."

Kalitan looked up quickly, and there was a sudden gleam in his dark eyes
that Ted had never seen before.

"Thlinkits never sell," he said. "Russians steal."

Mr. Strong put his hand kindly on the boy's head.

"You're right, Kalitan," he said. "The Russians never conquered the
Thlinkits, the bravest tribe in all Alaska.

"You see, Teddy, it was this way. A great many years ago, about 1740, a
Danish sailor named Bering, who was in the service of the Russians,
sailed across the ocean and discovered the strait named for him, and a
number of islands. Some of these were not inhabited, others had Indians
or Esquimos on them, but, after the manner of the early discoverers,
Bering took possession of them all in the name of the Emperor of
Russia. It doesn't seem right as we look at things now, but in those
days 'might made right,' and it was just the same way the English did
when they came to America.

"The Russians settled here, finding the fishing and furs fine things for
trade, and driving the Indians, who would not yield to them, farther and
farther inland. In 1790 the Czar made Alexander Baranoff manager of the
trading company. Baranoff established trading-posts in various places,
and settled at Sitka, where you can see the ruins of the splendid castle
he built. The Russians also sent missionaries to convert the Indians to
the Greek Church, which is the church of Russia. The Indians, however,
never learned to care for the Russians, and often were cruelly treated
by them. The Russians, however, tried to do something for their
education, and established several schools. One as early as 1775, on
Kadiak Island, had thirty pupils, who studied arithmetic, reading,
navigation, and four of the mechanical trades, and this is a better
record than the American purchasers can show, I am sorry to say.

"One of the recent travellers[6] in Alaska says that he met in the
country 'American citizens who never in their lives heard a prayer for
the President of the United States, nor of the Fourth of July, nor the
name of the capital of the nation, but who have been taught to pray for
the Emperor of Russia, to celebrate his birthday, and to commemorate the
victories of ancient Greece.' In March, 1867, the Russians sold Alaska
to the United States for $7,200,000 in gold. It was bought for a song
almost, when we consider the immense amount of money made for the
government by the seal fisheries, the cod and salmon industries, and
the opening of the gold fields. The resources of the country are not
half-known, and the government is beginning to see this. That is one of
the reasons they have sent me here, with the other men, to find out what
the earth holds for those who do not know how to look for its treasures.
Gold is not the best thing the earth produces. There is land in Alaska
little known full of coal and other useful minerals. Other land is
covered with magnificent timber which could be shipped to all parts of
the world. There are pasture-lands where stock will fatten like pigs
without any other feeding; there are fertile soils which will raise
almost any crops, and there are intelligent Indians who can be taught to
work and be useful members of society. I do not mean dragged off to the
United States to learn things they could never use in their home lives,
but who should be educated here to make the best of their talents in
their home surroundings.

"That is one crying shame to our government, that they have neglected
the Alaskan citizens. Forty years have been wasted, but we are beginning
to wake up now, and twenty years more will see the Indians of Kalitan's
generation industrious men and women, not only clever hunters and
fishermen, but lumbermen, coopers, furniture makers, farmers, miners,
and stock-raisers."

At this moment their quiet conversation was interrupted by a wild shout
from the shore, and, springing to their feet, they saw Chetwoof
gesticulating wildly and shouting to the Tyee, who had been mending his
canoe by the river-bank. Kalitan dropped everything and ran without a
word, scudding like the arrow from which he took his name. Before Ted
could follow or ask what was the matter, from the ocean a huge body rose
ten feet out of the water, spouting jets of spray twenty feet into the
air, the sun striking his sides and turning them to glistening silver.
Then it fell back, the waters churning into frothy foam for a mile
around.

"It's a whale, Ted, sure as you live. Luck certainly is coming your
way," said his father; but, at the word "whale," Ted had started after
Kalitan, losing no time in getting to the scene of action as fast as
possible.

"Watch the Tyee!" called Kalitan over his shoulder, as both boys ran
down to the water's edge.

The old chief was launching his _kiak_ into the seething waters, and to
Ted it seemed incredible that he meant to go in that frail bark in
pursuit of the mighty monster. The old man's face, however, was as calm
as though starting on a pleasure-trip in peaceful waters, and Ted
watched in breathless admiration to see what would happen next.

Klake paddled swiftly out to sea, drawing as near as he dared to where
the huge monster splashed idly up and down like a great puppy at play.
He stopped the _kiak_ and watched; then poised his spear and threw it,
and so swift and graceful was his gesture that Ted exclaimed in
amazement.

"Tyee Klake best harpoon-thrower of all the Thlinkits," said Kalitan,
proudly. "Watch!"

Ted needed no such instructions. His keen eyes passed from fish to man
and back again, and no movement of the Tyee escaped him.

The instant the harpoon was thrown, the Tyee paddled furiously away, for
when a harpoon strikes a whale, he is likely to lash violently with his
tail, and may destroy his enemy, and this is a moment of terrible danger
to the harpooner. But the whale was too much astonished to fight, and,
with a terrific splash, he dived deep, deep into the water, to get rid
of that stinging thing in his side, in the cold green waters below.

[Illustration: "AWAY WENT ANOTHER STINGING LANCE."]

The Tyee waited, his grim face tense and earnest. It might have been
fifteen minutes, for whales often stay under water for twenty minutes
before coming to the surface to breathe, but to Kalitan and Ted it
seemed an hour.

Then the spray dashed high into the air again, and the instant the huge
body appeared, Klake drew near, and away went another stinging lance
again, swift and, oh! so sure of aim. This time the whale struck out
wildly, and Kalitan held his breath, while Ted gasped at the Tyee's
danger, for his _kiak_ rocked like a shell and then was quite hidden
from their sight by the spray which was dashed heavenward like clouds of
white smoke.

Once more the creature dived, and this time he stayed down only a few
minutes, and, when he came up, blood spouted into the air and dyed the
sea crimson, and Kalitan exclaimed:

"Pierced his lungs! Now he must die."

There was one more bright, glancing weapon flying through the air, and
Ted noticed attached to it by a thong a curious-looking bulb, and asked
Kalitan:

"What is on that lance?"

"Sealskin buoy," said Kalitan. "We make the bag and blow it up, tie it
to the harpoon, and when the lance sticks into the whale, the buoy makes
it very hard for him to dive. After awhile he dies and drifts ashore."

The waters about the whale were growing red, and the carcass seemed
drifting out to sea, and at last the Tyee seemed satisfied. He sent a
last look toward the huge body, then turned his _kiak_ toward the
watchers on the banks.

"If it only comes to shore," said Kalitan.

"What will you do with it?" asked Ted.

"Oh, there are lots of things we can do with a whale," said Kalitan.
"The blubber is the best thing to eat in all the world. Then we use the
oil in a bowl with a bit of pith in it to light our huts. The bones are
all useful in building our houses. Whales were once bears, but they
played too much on the shore and ran away to sea, so they wore off all
their fur on the rocks, and had their feet nibbled off by the fishes."

"Well, this one didn't have his tail nibbled off at any rate," laughed
Ted. "I saw it flap at the Tyee, and thought that was the last of him,
sure."

"Tyee much big chief," said Kalitan, and just then the old man's _kiak_
drew near them, and he stepped ashore as calmly as though he had not
just been through so exciting a scene with a mighty monster of the
deep.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] Dr. Sheldon Jackson, General Agent of Education in the Territory.




CHAPTER VI

THE ISLAND HOME OF KALITAN


SWIFT and even were the strokes of the paddles as the canoes sped over
the water toward Kalitan's island home. Ted was so excited that he could
hardly sit still, and Tyee Klake gave him a warning glance and a
muttered "Kooletchika."[7]

The day before a big canoe had come to the camp, the paddlers bearing
messages for the Tyee, and he had had a long conversation with Mr.
Strong. The result was astonishing to Teddy, for his father told him
that he was to go for a month to the island with Kalitan. This delighted
him greatly, but he was a little frightened when he found that his
father was to stay behind.

"It's just this way, son," Mr. Strong explained to him. "I'm here in
government employ, taking government pay to do government work. I must
do it and do it well in the shortest time possible. You will have a far
better time on the island with Kalitan than you could possibly have
loafing around the camp here. You couldn't go to many places where I am
going, and, if my mind is easy about you, I can take Chetwoof and do my
work in half the time. I'll come to the island in three or four weeks,
and we'll take a week's vacation together, and then we'll hit the trail
for the gold-fields. Are you satisfied with this arrangement?"

"Yes, sir." Ted's tone was dubious, but his face soon cleared up. "A
month won't be very long, father."

"No, I'll wager you'll be sorry to leave when I come for you. Try and
not make any trouble. Of course Indian ways are not ours, but you'll get
used to it all and enjoy it. It's a chance most boys would be crazy
over, and you'll have tales to tell when you get home to make your
playmates envy you. I'm glad I have a son I can trust to keep straight
when he is out of my sight," and he laid his hand affectionately on the
boy's shoulder. Ted looked his father squarely in the eye, but gave only
a little nod in answer, then he laughed his clear, ringing laugh.

"Wouldn't mother have spasms!" he exclaimed. Mr. Strong laughed too, but
said:

"You'll be just as well off tumbling around with Kalitan as falling off
a glacier or two, as you would be certain to do if you were with me."

Teddy felt a little blue when he said good-bye to his father, but
Kalitan quickly dispelled his gloom by a great piece of news.

"Great time on island," he said, as the canoe glided toward the dim
outline of land to which Ted's thoughts had so often turned. "Tyee's
whale came ashore. We go to see him cut up."

"Hurrah!" cried Ted, delighted. "To think I shall see all that! What
else will we do, Kalitan?"

"Hunt, fish, hear old Kala-kash stories. See berry dance if you stay
long enough, perhaps a potlatch; do many things," said the Indian.

One of the Indian paddlers said something to Kalitan, and he laughed a
little, and Ted asked, curiously: "What did he say?"

"Said Kalitan Tenas learned to talk as much as a Boston boy," said
Kalitan, laughing heartily, and Ted laughed, too.

The canoes were nearing the shore of a wooded island, and Ted saw a
fringe of trees and some native houses clustered picturesquely against
them at the crest of a small hill which sloped down to the water's
edge, where stood a group of people awaiting the canoes.

[Illustration: "A GROUP OF PEOPLE AWAITING THE CANOES."]

"My home," said Kalitan, pointing to the largest house, "my people."
There was a great deal of pride in his tone and look, and he received a
warm welcome as the canoes touched land and their occupants sprang on
shore. The boys crowded around the young Indian and chattered and
gesticulated toward Ted, while a bright-looking little Malamute sprang
upon Kalitan and nearly knocked him down, covering his face with eager
puppy kisses.

The girls were less boisterous, and regarded Teddy with shy curiosity.
Some of them were quite pretty, and the babies were as cunning as the
puppies. They barked every time the dogs did, in a funny, hoarse little
way, and, indeed, Alaskan babies learn to bark long before they learn to
talk.

The Tyee's wife received Teddy kindly, and he soon found himself
quite at home among these hospitable people, who seemed always friendly
and natural. Nearly all spoke some English, and he rapidly added to his
store of Chinook, so that he had no trouble in making himself understood
or in understanding. Of course he missed his father, but he had little
time to be lonely. Life in the village was anything but uneventful.

At first there was the whale to be attended to, and all the village
turned out for that. The huge creature had drifted ashore on the farther
side of the island, and Ted was much interested in seeing him gradually
disposed of. Great masses of blubber were stripped from the sides to be
used later both for food and fuel, the whalebone was carefully secured
to be sold to the traders, and it seemed to Ted that there was not one
thing in that vast carcass for which the Indians did not have some use.

Ted soon tired of watching the many things done with the whale, but
there was plenty to do and see in the village.

The village houses were all alike. There was one large room in which the
people cooked, ate, and slept. The girls had blankets strung across one
corner, behind which were their beds. Teddy was given one also for his
corner of the great room in the Tyee's house.

He learned to eat the food and to like it very much. There was dried
fish, herons' eggs, berries, or those put up in seal oil, which is
obtained by frying the fat out of the blubber of the seal. The Alaskans
use this oil in nearly all their cooking, and are very fond of it. Ted
ate also dried seaweed, chopped and boiled in seal oil, which tasted
very much like boiled and salted leather, but he liked it very well.
Indeed he grew so strong and well, out-of-doors all day in the clear air
and bright sunshine of the Alaskan June, that he could eat anything and
tramp all day without being too tired to sleep like a top all night,
and wake ready for a new day with a zest he never felt at home.

Fresh fish were plentiful. The boys caught salmon, smelts, and
whitefish, and many were dried for the coming winter, while clams,
gum-boots, sea-cucumbers, and devil-fish, found on the rocks of the
shore, were every-day diet.

Kalitan's sister and Ted became great friends. She was older than
Kalitan, and, though only fifteen, was soon to be married to Tah-ge-ah,
a fine young Indian who was ready to pay high for her, which was not
strange, for she was both pretty and sweet.

"At the next full moon," said Kalitan, "there will be a potlatch, and
Tanana will be sold to Tah-ge-ah. He says he will give four hundred
blankets for her, and my uncle is well pleased. Many only pay ten
blankets for a wife, but of course we would not sell my sister for that.
She is of high caste, chief's daughter, niece, and sister," the boy
spoke proudly, and Ted answered:

"She's so pretty, too. She's not like the Indian girls I saw at Wrangel
and Juneau. Why, there the women sat around as dirty as dogs on the
sidewalk, and didn't seem to care how they looked. They had baskets to
sell, and were too lazy to care whether any one bought them or not. They
weren't a bit like Tanana. She's as pretty as a Japanese."

Kalitan smiled, well pleased, and Ted added, "I guess the Thlinkits must
be the best Indians in Alaska."

Kalitan laughed outright at this.

"Thlinkits pretty good," he said. "Tanana good girl. She learned much
good at the mission school, marry Tah-ge-ah, and make people better. She
can weave blankets, make fine baskets, and keep house like a white
girl."

"She's all right," said Ted. "But, Kalitan, what is a potlatch?"

"Potlatch is a good-will feast," said his friend. "Very fine thing, but
white men do not like. Say Indian feasts are all bad. Why is it bad when
an Indian gives away all his goods for others? That is what a great
potlatch is. When white men give us whiskey and it is drunk too much,
then it is very bad. But Tyee will not have that for Tanana's feast. We
will drink only quass,[8] as my people made it before they learned evil
drinks and fire-water, which make them crazy."

"I guess Tyee Klake was right when he said all men were alike," said
Ted, sagely. "It seems to me that there are good and bad ones in all
countries. It's a pity you have had such bad white ones here in Alaska,
but I guess you have had good ones, too."

"Plenty good, plenty bad, Thlinkit men and Boston men," said Kalitan,
"all same."

FOOTNOTES:

[7] "Dangerous channel."

[8] Quass is a native drink, harmless and acid, made with rye and water
fermented. The bad Indians mix it with sugar, flour, dried apples, and
hops, and make a terribly intoxicating drink.




CHAPTER VII

TWILIGHT TALES AND TOTEMS


"ONCE a small girl child went by night to bring water. In the skies
above she saw the Moon shining brightly, pale and placid, and she put
forth her tongue at it, which was an evil thing, for the Moon is old,
and a Thlinkit child should show respect for age. So the Moon would not
endure so rude a thing from a girl child, and it came down from the sky
and took her thither. She cried out in fear and caught at the long grass
to keep herself from going up, but the Moon was strong and took her with
her water-bucket and her bunch of grass, and she never came back. Her
mother wept for her, but her father said: 'Cease. We have other girl
children; she is now wedded to the Moon; to him we need not give a
potlatch.'

"You may see her still, if you will look at the Moon, there, grass in
one hand, bucket in the other, and when the new Moon tips to one side
and the water spills from the clouds and it is the months of rain, it is
the bad Moon maiden tipping over her water-bucket upon the earth. No
Thlinkit child would dare ever to put her tongue forth at the Moon, for
fear of a like fate to that of Squi-ance, the Moon maiden."

Tanana's voice was soft and low, and she looked very pretty as she sat
in the moonlight at the door of the hut and told Kalitan and Ted quaint
old stories. Ted was delighted with her tales, and begged for another
and yet another, and Tanana told the quaint story of Kagamil.

"A mighty _toyon_[9] dwelt on the island of Kagamil. By name he was
Kat-haya-koochat, and he was of great strength and much to be feared. He
had long had a death feud with people of the next totem, but the bold
warrior Yakaga, chieftain of the tribe, married the toyon's daughter,
and there was no more feud. Zampa was the son of Kat-haya-koochat, and
his pride. He built for this son a fine _bidarka_,[10] and the boy
launched it on the sea. His father watched him sail and called him to
return, lest evil befall. But Zampa heard not his father's voice and
pursued diving birds,[11] and, lo! he was far from land and the dark
fell. He sailed to the nearest shore and beheld the village of Yakaga,
where the people of his sister's husband made him welcome, though Yakaga
was not within his hut. There was feasting and merry-making, and,
according to their custom, he, the stranger, was given a chieftain's
daughter to wife, and her name was Kitt-a-youx; and Zampa loved her and
she him, and he returned not home. But Kitt-a-youx's father liked him
not, and treated him with rudeness because of the old enmity with his
Tyee father, so Zampa said to Kitt-a-youx: 'Let us go hence. We cannot
be happy here. Let us go from your father, who is unfriendly to me, and
seek the _barrabora_ of my father, the mighty chief, that happiness may
come upon us,' and Kitt-a-youx said: 'What my lord says is well.'

"Then Zampa placed her in his canoe, and alone beneath the stars they
sailed and it was well, and Zampa's arm was strong at his paddle. But,
lo! they heard another paddle, and one came after them, and soon arrows
flew about them, arrows swift and cruel, and one struck his paddle from
his hand and his canoe was overturned. The pursuer came and placed
Kitt-a-youx in his canoe, seeking, too, for Zampa, but, alas! Zampa was
drowned. And when his pursuer dragged his body to the surface, he gave
a mighty cry, for, lo! it was his brother-in-law whom he had pursued,
for he was Yakaga. Then fearing the terrible rage of Zampa's father, he
dared not return with the body, so he left it with the overturned canoe
in the kelp and weeds. Kitt-a-youx he bore with him to his own island.
There she was sad as the sea-gull's scream, for the lord she loved was
dead. And her father gave her to another _toyon_, who was cruel to her,
and her life was as a slave's, and she loathed her life until Zampa's
child was born to her, and for it she lived. Alas, it was a girl child
and her husband hated it, and Kitt-a-youx saw nothing for it but to be
sold as a slave as was she herself. And she looked by day and by night
at the sea, and its cold, cold waves seemed warmer to her than the arms
of men. 'With my girl child I shall go hence,' she whispered to herself,
'and the Great Unknown Spirit will be kind.'

"So by night she stole away in a canoe and steered to sea, ere she knew
where she was, reaching the seaweeds where she had journeyed with her
young husband. The morning broke, and she saw the weeds and the kelp
where her lover had gone from her sight, and, with a glad sigh, she
clasped Zampa's child to her breast and sank down among the weeds where
he had died. So her tired spirit was at rest, for a woman is happier who
dies with him she loves.

"Now Zampa's father had found his boy's body and mourned over it, and
buried it in a mighty cave, the which he had once made for his furs and
stores. With it he placed bows and arrows and many valuables in respect
for the dead. And Zampa's sister, going to his funeral feast, fell upon
a stone with her child, so that both were killed. Then broke the old
chief's heart. Beside her brother he laid her in the cave, and gave
orders that he himself should be placed there as well, when grief
should have made way with him. Then he died of sorrow for his children,
and his people interred him in his burial cave, and with him they put
much wealth and blankets and weapons.

"When, therefore, the people of his tribe found the bodies of
Kitt-a-youx and her child among the kelp, having heard of her love for
Zampa, they bore them to the same cave, and, wrapping them in furs, they
placed Kitt-a-youx beside her beloved husband, and in her burial she
found her home and felt the kindness of the Great Spirit. This, then, is
the story of the burial cave of Kagamil, and since that day no man dwelt
upon the island, and it is known as the 'island of the dead.'"

"I'd like to see it, I can tell you," said Ted. "Are there any burial
caves around here?"

"The Thlinkits do not bury in caves," said Tanana. "We used to burn our
dead, but often we place them in totem-poles."

"I thought those great poles by your doors were totems," said Ted,
puzzled.

"Yes," said the girl. "They are caste totems, and all who are of any
rank have them. As we belong to the Raven, or Bear, or Eagle clan, we
have the carved poles to show our rank, but the totem of the dead is
quite different. It does not stand beside the door, but far away. It is
alone, as the soul of the dead in whose honour it is made. It is but
little carved. A square hole is cut at the back of the pole, and the
body of the dead, wrapped in a matting of cedar bark, is placed within,
a board being nailed so that the body will not fall to the ground. A
potlatch is given, and food from the feast is put in the fire for the
dead person."

"It seems queer to put weapons and blankets and things to eat on
people's graves," said Ted. "Why do they do it?"

"Of the dead we know nothing," said Tanana. "Perhaps the warrior spirit
wishes his arrows in the Land of the Great Unknown."

"Yes, but he can't come back for them," persisted Ted.

"At Wrangel, Boston man put flowers on his girl's grave," said Kalitan,
drily. "She come back and smell posy?"

Having no answer ready, Ted changed the subject and asked:

"Why do you have the raven at the top of your totem pole?"

"Indian cannot marry same totem," said Kalitan. "My father was eagle
totem, my mother was raven totem. He carve her totem at the top of the
pole, then his totem and those of the family are carved below. The
greater the family the taller the totem."

"How do you get these totems?" demanded Ted.

"Clan totems we take from our parents, but a man may choose his own
totem. Before he becomes a man he must go alone into the forest to
fast, and there he chooses his totem, and he is brother to that animal
all his life, and may not kill it. When he comes forth, he may take part
in all the ceremonies of his tribe."

"Why, it is something like knighthood and the vigil at arms and
escutcheons, and all those Round-Table things," exclaimed Ted, in
delight, for he dearly loved the stirring tales of King Arthur and his
knights and the doughty deeds of Camelot.

"Tell us about that," said Kalitan, so Ted told them many tales in the
moonlight, as they sat beneath the shadows of the quaint and curious
totem-poles of Kalitan's tribe.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Chieftain.

[10] Canoe.

[11] Ducks.




CHAPTER VIII

THE BERRY DANCE


TEDDY'S month upon the island stretched out into two. His father came
and went, finding the boy so happy and well that he left him with an
easy mind. Ted's fair skin was tanned to a warm brown, and, clad in
Indian clothes, save for his aureole of copper-coloured hair, so strong
a contrast to the straight black locks of his Indian brothers, he could
hardly be told from one of the island lads who roamed all day by wood
and shore. They called him "Yakso pil chicamin,"[12] and all the village
liked him.

Tanana's marriage-feast was held, and she and Tah-ge-ah went to
housekeeping in a little hut, where the one room was as clean and neat
as could be, and not a bit like the dirty rooms of some of the natives.
Tanana spent all her spare time weaving beautiful baskets, for her slim
fingers were very skilful. Some of the baskets which she made out of the
inner bark of the willow-tree were woven so closely that they would hold
water, and Teddy never tired of watching her weave the gay colours in
and out, nor of seeing the wonderful patterns grow. Tah-ge-ah would take
them to the mainland when she had enough made, and sell them to the
travellers from the States. Meantime Tah-ge-ah himself was very, very
busy carving the totem-pole for his new home, for Tanana was a
chieftain's daughter, and he, too, was of high caste, and their totem
must be carved and stand one hundred feet high beside their door, lest
they be reproached.

Ted also enjoyed seeing old Kala-kash carve, for he was the finest
carver among the Indians, and it was wonderful to see him cut strange
figures out of bone, wood, horn, fish-bones, and anything his gnarled
old fingers could get hold of, and he would carve grasshoppers, bears,
minnows, whales, sea-gulls, babies, or idols. He made, too, a canoe for
Ted, a real Alaskan dugout, shaping the shell from a log and making it
soft by steam, filling the hole with water and throwing in red-hot
stones. The wood was then left to season, and Ted could hardly wait
patiently until sun and wind and rain had made his precious craft
seaworthy. Then it was painted with paint made by rubbing a certain rock
over the surface of a coarse stone and the powder mixed with oil or
water.

At last it was done, a shapely thing, more beautiful in Ted's eyes than
any launch or yacht he had ever seen at home. His canoe had a carved
stern and a sharp prow which came out of the water, and which had carved
upon it a fine eagle. Kala-kash had not asked Ted what his totem was,
but supposing that the American eagle on the buttons of the boy's coat
was his emblem, had carved the rampant bird upon the canoe as the boy's
totem. Ted learned to paddle and to fish, never so well as Kalitan, of
course, for he was born to it, but still he did very well, and enjoyed
it hugely.

Happily waned the summer days, and then came the time of the berry
dance, which Kalitan had spoken of so often that Ted was very anxious to
see it.

The salmon-berry was fully ripe, a large and luscious berry, found in
two colours, yellow and dark red. Besides these there were other small
berries, maruskins, like the New England dewberries, huckleberries, and
whortleberries.

"We have five kinds of berries on our island," said Kalitan. "All good.
The birds, flying from the mainland, first brought the seeds, and our
berries grow larger than almost any place in Alaska."

"They're certainly good," said Ted, his mouth full as he spoke. "These
salmon-berries are a kind of a half-way between our blackberries and
strawberries. I never saw anything prettier than the way the red and
yellow berries grow so thick on the same bush--"

"There come the canoes!" interrupted Kalitan, and the two boys ran down
to the water's edge, eager to be the first to greet the visitors. Tyee
Klake was giving a feast to the people of the neighbouring islands, and
a dozen canoes glided over the water from different directions. The
canoes were all gaily decorated, and they came swiftly onward to the
weird chant of the paddlers, which the breeze wafted to the listeners'
ears in a monotonous melody.

Every one in the village had been astir since daybreak, preparing for
the great event. Parallel lines had been strung from the chief's house
to the shore, and from these were hung gay blankets, pieces of bright
calico, and festoons of leaves and flowers. As the canoes landed their
occupants, the dancers thronged to welcome their guests. The great drum
sounded its loud note, and the dancers, arrayed in wonderful blankets
woven in all manner of fanciful designs and trimmed with long woollen
fringes, swayed back and forth, up and down, to and fro, in a very
graceful manner, keeping time to the music.

In the centre of the largest canoe stood the Tyee of a neighbouring
island, a tall Indian, dressed in a superb blanket with fringe a foot
long, fringed leggins and moccasins of walrus hide, and the chief's hat
to show his rank. It was a peculiar head-dress half a foot high, trimmed
in down and feathers.

The Tyee, in perfect time to the music, swayed back and forth, never
ceasing for a moment, shaking his head so that the down was wafted in a
snowy cloud all over him.

As the canoes reached the shallows, the shore Indians dashed into the
water to draw them up to land, and the company was joyously received.
Teddy was delighted, for in one of the canoes was his father, whom he
had not seen for several weeks. After the greetings were over, the
dancers arranged themselves in opposite lines, men on one side, women on
the other, and swayed their bodies while the drum kept up its unceasing
tum-tum-tum.

"It's a little bit like square dances at home," said Ted. "It's ever so
pretty, isn't it? First they sway to the right, then to the left, over
and over and over; then they bend their bodies forward and backward
without bending their knees, then sway again, and bend to one side and
then the other, singing all the time. Isn't it odd, father?"

"It certainly is, but it's very graceful," said Mr. Strong. "Some of the
girls are quite pretty, gentle-looking creatures, but the older women
are ugly."

"The very old women look like the mummies in the museum at home," said
Ted. "There's one old woman, over a hundred years old, whose skin is
like a piece of parchment, and she wears the hideous lip-button which
most of the Thlinkits have stopped using. Kalitan says all the women
used to wear them. The girls used to make a cut in their chins between
the lip and the chin, and put in a piece of wood, changing it every few
days for a piece a little larger until the opening was stretched like a
second mouth. When they grew up, a wooden button like the bowl of a
spoon was set in the hole and constantly enlarged. The largest I have
seen was three inches long. Isn't it a curious idea, father?"

"It certainly is, but there is no telling what women will admire. A
Chinese lady binds her feet, and an American her waist; a Maori woman
slits her nose, and an English belle pierces her ears. It's on the same
principle that your Thlinkit friends slit their chins for the
lip-button."

"I'm mighty glad they don't do it now, for Tanana's as pretty as a pink,
and it would be a shame to spoil her face that way," said Ted. "The
dancing has stopped, father; let's see what they'll do next. There comes
Kalitan."

A feast of berries was to follow the dance, and Kalitan led Mr. Strong
and Ted to the chief's house, which was gaily decorated with blankets
and bits of bright cloth. A table covered with a cloth was laid around
three sides of the room, and on this was spread hardtack and huge bowls
of berries of different colours. These were beaten up with sugar into a
foamy mixture, pink, purple, and yellow, according to the colour of the
berries, which tasted good and looked pretty.

Ted and Kalitan had helped gather the berries, and their appetites were
quite of the best. Mr. Strong smiled to see how the once fussy little
gentleman helped himself with a right good-will to the Indian dainties
of his friends.

Many pieces of goods had been provided for the potlatch, and these were
given away, given and received with dignified politeness. There was
laughing and merriment with the feast, and when it was all over, the
canoes floated away as they had come, into the sunset, which gilded all
the sea to rosy, golden beauty.

Ted's share of the potlatch was a beautiful blanket of Tanana's weaving,
and he was delighted beyond measure.

"You're a lucky boy, Ted," said his father. "People pay as high as
sixty-five dollars for an Alaskan blanket, and not always a perfect one
at that. Many of the Indians are using dyed yarns to weave them, but
yours is the genuine article, made from white goat's wool, long and
soft, and dyed only in the native reds and blacks. We shall have to do
something nice for Tanana when you leave."

"I'd like to give her something, and Kalitan, too." Ted's face looked
very grave. "When do I have to go, father?"

"Right away, I'm afraid," was the reply. "I've let you stay as long as
possible, and now we must start for our northern trip, if you are to see
anything at all of mines and Esquimos before we start home. The
mail-steamer passes Nuchek day after to-morrow, and we must go over
there in time to take it."

"Yes, sir," said Ted, forlornly. He wanted to see the mines and all the
wonderful things of the far north, but he hated to leave his Indian
friends.

"What's the trouble, Ted?" His father laid his hand on his shoulder,
disliking to see the bright face so clouded.

"I was only thinking of Kalitan," said Ted.

"Suppose we take Kalitan with us," said Mr. Strong.

"Oh, daddy, could we really?" Ted jumped in excitement.

"I'll ask the Tyee if he will lend him to us for a month," said Mr.
Strong, and in a few minutes it was decided, and Ted, with one great
bear's hug to thank his father, rushed off to find his friend and tell
him the glorious news.

FOOTNOTE:

[12] Copper hair.




CHAPTER IX

ON THE WAY TO NOME


"WELL, boys, we're off for a long sail, and I'm afraid you will be
rather tired with the steamer before you are done with her," said Mr.
Strong. They had boarded the mail-steamer late the night before, and,
going right to bed, had wakened early next day and rushed on deck to
find the August sun shining in brilliant beauty, the islands quite out
of sight, and nought but sea and sky around and above them.

"Oh, I don't know; we'll find something to do," said Teddy. "You'll have
to tell us lots about the places we pass, and, if there aren't any other
boys on board, Kalitan and I will be together. What's the first place we
stop?"

"We passed the Kenai Peninsula in the night. I wish you could have
caught a glimpse of some of the waterfalls, volcanoes, and glaciers.
They are as fine as any in Alaska," said Mr. Strong. "Our next stop will
be Kadiak Island."

"Kadiak Island was once near the mainland," said Kalitan. "There was
only the narrowest passage of water, but a great Kenai otter tried to
swim the pass, and was caught fast. He struggled so that he made it
wider and wider, and at last pushed Kadiak way out to sea."

"He must have been a whopper," said Ted, "to push it so far away. Is
that the island?"

"Yes," said his father. "There are no splendid forests on the island as
there are on the mainland, but the grasses are superb, for the fog and
rain here keeps them green as emerald."

"What a queer canoe that Indian has!" exclaimed Ted. "It isn't a bit
like yours, Kalitan."

"It is _bidarka_," said Kalitan. "Kadiak people make canoe out of walrus
hide. They stretch it over frames of driftwood. It holds two people.
They sit in small hatch with apron all around their bodies, and the
_bidarka_ goes over the roughest sea and floats like a bladder. Big
_bidarka_ called an _oomiak_, and holds whole family."

"Some one has called the _bidarkas_ the 'Cossacks of the sea,'" said Mr.
Strong. "They skim along like swallows, and are as perfectly built as
any vessel I ever saw."

"What are those huge buildings on the small island?" asked Ted, as the
steamer wound through the shallows.

"Ice-houses," said his father. "Before people learned to manufacture
ice, immense cargoes were shipped from here to as far south as San
Francisco."

"It was fun to see them go fishing for ice from the steamer when we came
up to Skaguay," said Ted. "The sailors went out in a boat, slipped a
net around a block of ice and towed it to the side of the ship, then it
was hitched to a derrick and swung on deck."

"Huh!" said Kalitan. "What people want ice for stored up? Think they'd
store sunshine!"

"If you could invent a way to do that, you could make a fortune, my
boy," said Mr. Strong, laughing. "The next place of any interest is
Karluk. It's around on the other side of the island in Shelikoff Strait,
and is famous for its salmon canneries. Nearly half of the entire salmon
pack of Alaska comes from Kadiak Island, most of the fish coming from
the Karluk River."

"Very bad for Indians," said Kalitan. "Used to have plenty fish. Tyee
Klake said salmon used to come up this river in shoal sixteen miles
long, and now Boston men take them all."

"It does seem a pity that the Indians don't even have a chance to earn
their living in the canneries," said Mr. Strong. "The largest cannery in
the world is at Karluk. There are thousands of men employed, and in one
year over three million salmon were packed, yet with all this work for
busy hands to do, the canneries employ Chinese, Greek, Portuguese, and
American workmen in preference to the Indians, bringing them by the
shipload from San Francisco."

"What other places do we pass?" asked Ted.

"A lot of very interesting ones, and I wish we could coast along,
stopping wherever we felt like it," said Mr. Strong. "The Shumagin
Islands are where Bering, the great discoverer and explorer, landed in
1741 to bury one of his crew. Codfish were found there, and Captain
Cook, in his 'Voyages and Discoveries,' speaks of the same fish. There
is a famous fishery there now called the Davidson Banks, and the
codfishing fleet has its headquarters on Popoff Island. Millions of
codfish are caught here every year. These islands are also a favourite
haunt of the sea otter. Belofsky, at the foot of Mt. Pavloff, is the
centre of the trade."

[Illustration: MOUNT SHISHALDIN.]

"What kind of fur is otter?" asked Ted, whose mind was so inquiring that
his father often called him the "living catechism."

"It is the court fur of China and Russia, and at one time the common
people were forbidden by law to wear it," said Mr. Strong. "It is a
rich, purplish brown sprinkled with silver-tipped hairs, and the skins
are very costly."

"At one time any one could have otter," said Kalitan. "We hunted them
with spears and bows and arrows. Now they are very few, and we find them
only in dangerous spots, hiding on rocks or floating kelp. Sometimes the
hunters have to lie in hiding for days watching them. Only Indians can
kill the otter. Boston men can if they marry Indian women. That makes
them Indian."

"Rather puts otter at a discount and women at a premium," laughed Mr.
Strong. "Now we pass along near the Alaska peninsula, past countless
isles and islets, through the Fox Islands to Unalaska, and then into the
Bering Sea. One of the most interesting things in this region is called
the 'Pacific Ring of Fire,' a chain of volcanoes which stretches along
the coast. Often the passengers can see from the ships at night a
strange red glow over the sky, and know that the fire mountains are
burning. The most beautiful of these volcanoes is Mt. Shishaldin, nearly
nine thousand feet high, and almost as perfect a cone in shape as Fuji
Yama, which the Japanese love so much and call 'the Honourable
Mountain.' At Unalaska or Ilinlink, the 'curving beach,' we stop. If we
could stay over for awhile, there are a great many interesting things we
could see; an old Greek church and the government school are in the
town, and Bogoslov's volcano and the sea-lion rookeries are on the
island of St. John, which rose right up out of the sea in 1796 after a
day's roaring and rumbling and thundering. In 1815 there was a similar
performance, and from time to time the island has grown larger ever
since. One fine day in 1883 there was a great shower of ashes, and, when
the clouds had rolled away, two peaks were seen where only one had been,
separated by a sandy isthmus. This last was reduced to a fine thread by
the earthquake of 1891, and I don't know what new freaks it may have
developed by now. I know some friends of mine landed there not long ago
and cooked eggs over the jets of steam which gush out of the
mountainside. Did you ever hear of using a volcano for a cook-stove?"

"Well, I should say not," said Ted, amused. "These Alaskan volcanoes are
great things."

"The one called Makushin has a crater filled with snow in a part of
which there is always a cloud of sulphurous smoke. That's making
extremes meet, isn't it?"

"Yehl[13] made many strange things," said Kalitan, who had been taking
in all this information even more eagerly than Teddy. "He first dwelt on
Nass River, and turned two blades of grass into the first man and woman.
Then the Thlinkits grew and prospered, till darkness fell upon the
earth. A Thlinkit stole the sun and hid it in a box, but Yehl found it
and set it so high in the heavens that none could touch it. Then the
Thlinkits grew and spread abroad. But a great flood came, and all were
swept away save two, who tossed long upon the flood on a raft of logs
until Yehl pitied, and carried them to Mt. Edgecomb, where they dwelt
until the waters fell."

"Old Kala-kash tells this story, and he says that one of these people,
when very old, went down through the crater of the mountain, and, given
long life by Yehl, stays there always to hold up the earth out of the
water. But the other lives in the crater as the Thunder Bird, Hahtla,
whose wing-flap is the thunder and whose glance is the lightning. The
osprey is his totem, and his face glares in our blankets and totems."

"I've wondered what that fierce bird was," said Teddy, who was always
quite carried away with Kalitan's strange legends.

"Well, what else do we see on the way to Nome, father?"

"The most remarkable thing happening in the Bering Sea is the seal
industry, but I do not think we pass near enough to the islands to see
any of that. You'd better run about and see the ship now," and the boys
needed no second permission.

It was not many days before they knew everybody on board, from captain
to deck hands, and were prime favourites with them all. Ted and Kalitan
enjoyed every moment. There was always something new to see or hear, and
ere they reached their journey's end, they had heard all about seals and
sealing, although the famous Pribylov Islands were too far to the west
of the vessel's route for them to see them. They sighted the United
States revenue cutter which plies about the seal islands to keep off
poachers, for no one is allowed to kill seals or to land on this
government reservation except from government vessels. The scent of the
rookeries, where millions of seals have been killed in the last hundred
years, is noticed far out at sea, and often the barking of the animals
can be heard by passing vessels.

"Why is sealskin so valuable, father?" asked Ted.

"It has always been admired because it is so warm and soft," replied Mr.
Strong. "All the ladies fancy it, and it never seems to go out of
fashion. There was a time, when the Pribylov Islands were first
discovered, that sealskins were so plentiful that they sold in Alaska
for a dollar apiece. Hunters killed so many, killing old and young, that
soon there were scarcely any left, so a law was passed by the Russian
government forbidding any killing for five years. Since the Americans
have owned Alaska they have protected the seals, allowing them to be
killed only at certain times, and only male seals from two to four years
old are killed. The Indians are always the killers, and are wonderfully
swift and clever, never missing a blow and always killing instantly, so
that there is almost no suffering."

"How do they know where to find the seals?" asked Ted.

"For half the year the seals swim about the sea, but in May they return
to their favourite haunts. In these rookeries families of them herd on
the rocks, the male staying at home with his funny little black
puppies, while the mother swims about seeking food. The seals are very
timid, and will rush into the water at the least strange noise. A story
is told that the barking of a little pet dog belonging to a Russian at
one of the rookeries lost him a hundred thousand dollars, for the seals
took fright and scurried away before any one could say 'Jack Robinson!'"

"Rather an expensive pup!" commented Ted. "But what about the seals,
daddy?"

"You seem to think I am an encyclopaedia on the seal question," said his
father. "There is not much else to tell you."

"How can they manage always to kill the right ones?" demanded Ted.

"The gay bachelor seals herd together away from the rest and sleep at
night on the rocks. Early in the morning the Aleuts slip in between them
and the herd and drive them slowly to the killing-ground, where they are
quickly killed and skinned and the skins taken to the salting-house.
The Indians use the flesh and blubber, and the climate is such that
before another year the hollow bones are lost in the grass and earth."

"What becomes of the skins after they are salted?"

"They are usually sent to London, where they are prepared for market.
The work is all done by hand, which is one reason that they are so
expensive. They are first worked in sawdust, cleaned, scraped, washed,
shaved, plucked, dyed with a hand-brush from eight to twelve times,
washed again and freed from the least speck of grease by a last bath in
hot sawdust or sand."

"I don't wonder a sealskin coat costs so much," said Ted, "if they have
got to go through all that performance. I wish we could have seen the
islands, but I'd hate to see the seals killed. It doesn't seem like
hunting just to knock them on the head. It's too much like the
stock-yards at home."

"Yes, but it's a satisfaction to know that it's done in the easiest
possible way for the animals.

"What a lot you are learning way up here in Alaska, aren't you, son?
To-morrow we'll be at Nome, and then your head will be so stuffed with
mines and mining that you will forget all about everything else."

"I don't want to forget any of it," said Ted. "It's all bully."

FOOTNOTE:

[13] Yehl, embodied in the raven, is the Thlinkit Great Spirit.




CHAPTER X

IN THE GOLD COUNTRY


A LOW, sandy beach, without a tree to break its level, rows of plain
frame-houses, some tents and wooden shanties scattered about, the surf
breaking over the shore in splendid foam,--this was Teddy's first
impression of Nome. They had sailed over from St. Michael's to see the
great gold-fields, and both the boys were full of eagerness to be on
land. It seemed, however, as if their desires were not to be realized,
for landing at Nome is a difficult matter.

Nome is on the south shore of that part of Alaska known as Seward
Peninsula, and it has no harbour. It is on the open seacoast and catches
all the fierce storms that sweep northward over Bering Sea. Generally
seacoast towns are built in certain spots because there is a harbour,
but Nome was not really built, it "jes' growed," for, when gold was
found there, the miners sat down to gather the harvest, caring nothing
about a harbour.

Ships cannot go within a mile of land, and passengers have to go ashore
in small lighters. Sometimes when they arrive, they cannot go ashore at
all, but have to wait several days, taking refuge behind a small island
ten miles away, lest they drag their anchors and be dashed to pieces on
the shore.

There had been a tremendous storm at Nome the day before Ted arrived,
and landing was more difficult than usual, but, impatient as the boys
were, at last it seemed safe to venture, and the party left the steamer
to be put on a rough barge, flat-bottomed and stout, which was hauled by
cable to shore until it grounded on the sands. They were then put in a
sort of wooden cage, let down by chains from a huge wooden beam, and
swung round in the air like the unloading cranes of a great city, over
the surf to a high platform on the land.

"Well, this is a new way to land," cried Ted, who had been rather quiet
during the performance, and his father thought a trifle frightened.
"It's a sort of a balloon ascension, isn't it?"

"It must be rather hard for the miners, who have been waiting weeks for
their mail, when the boat can't land her bags at all," said Mr. Strong.
"That sometimes happens. From November to May, Nome is cut off from the
world by snow and ice. The only news they receive is by the monthly mail
when it comes.

"Over at Kronstadt the Russians have ice-breaking boats which keep the
Baltic clear enough of ice for navigation, and plow their way through
ice fourteen feet thick for two hundred miles. The Nome miners are very
anxious for the government to try this ice-boat service at Nome."

"Why did people settle here in such a forlorn place?" asked Ted, as they
made their way to the town, which they found anything but civilized. "I
like the Indian houses on the island better than this."

"Your island is more picturesque," said Mr. Strong, "but people came
here for what they could get.

"In 1898 gold was discovered on Anvil Creek, which runs into Snake
River, and this turned people's eyes in the direction of Nome. Miners
rushed here and set to work in the gulches inland, but it was not till
the summer of 1899 that gold was found on the beach. A soldier from the
barracks--you know this is part of a United States Military
Reservation--found gold while digging a well near the beach, and an old
miner took out $1,200 worth in twenty days. Then a perfect frenzy seized
the people. They flocked to Nome from far and near; they camped on the
beach in hundreds and staked their claims. Between one and two thousand
men were at work on the beach at one time, yet so good-natured were they
that no quarrels seem to have occurred. Doctors, lawyers, barkeepers,
and all dropped their business and went to rocking, as they call
beach-mining."

[Illustration: "'LET'S WATCH THOSE TWO MEN. THEY HAVE EVIDENTLY STAKED A
CLAIM TOGETHER.'"]

"Oh, dad, let's hurry and go and see it," cried Ted, as they hurried
through their dinner at the hotel. "I thought gold came out of deep
mines like copper, and had to be melted out or something, but this seems
to be different. Do they just walk along the beach and pick it up? I
wish I could."

"Well, it's not quite so simple as that," said Mr. Strong, laughing.
"We'll go and see, and then you'll understand," and they went down the
crooked streets to the sandy beach.

Men were standing about talking and laughing, others working hard. All
manner of men were there scattered over the _tundra_,[14] and Ted
became interested in two who were working together in silence.

"What are they doing?" he asked his father. "I can't see how they expect
to get anything worth having out of this mess."

"Beach-mining is quite different from any other," said his father.
"Let's watch those two men. They have evidently staked a claim together,
which means that nobody but these two can work on the ground they have
staked out, and that they must share all the gold they find. They came
here to prospect, and evidently found a block of ground which suited
them. They then dug a prospect hole down two to five feet until they
struck 'bedrock,' which happens to be clay around here. They passed
through several layers of sand and gravel before reaching this, and
these were carefully examined to see how much gold they contained. Upon
reaching a layer which seemed to be a good one, the gravel on top was
stripped off and thrown aside and the 'pay streak' worked with the
rocker."

"What is that?" asked Ted, who was all ears, while Kalitan was taking in
everything with his sharp black eyes.

"That arrangement that looks like a square pan on a saw-buck is the
rocker. The rockers usually have copper bottoms, and there is a great
demand for sheet copper at Nome, but often there is not enough of it,
and the miners have been known to cover them with silver coins. That man
you are watching has silver dollars in his, about fifty, I should say.
It seems extravagant, doesn't it, but he'll take out many times that
amount if he has good luck."

The man, who had glanced up at them, smiled at that and said:

"And, if I don't have luck, I'm broke, anyhow, so fifty or sixty plunks
won't make much difference. You going to be a miner, youngster?"

"Not this trip," said Ted, with a smile. "Say, I'd like to know how you
get the gold out with that."

"At first we used to put a blanket in the rocker, and wash the pay dirt
on that. Our prospect hole has water in it, and we can use it over and
over. Some of the holes are dry, and there the men have to pack their
pay dirt down to the shore and use surf water for washing. Most of our
gold is so fine that the blanket didn't stop it, so now we use 'quick.'
I reckon you'd call it mercury, but we call it quick. You see, it saves
time, and work-time up here is so short, on account of winter setting in
so early, that we have to save up our spare minutes and not waste 'em on
long words."

Ted grinned cheerfully and asked: "What do you do with the quick?"

"We paint it over the bottom of the rocker, and it acts like a charm
and catches every speck of gold that comes its way as the dirt is washed
over it. The quick and the gold make a sort of amalgam."

"But how do you get at the gold after it amalgams, or whatever you call
it?" asked Ted.

"Sure we fry it in the frying-pan, and it's elegant pancakes it makes,"
said the man. "See here," and he pulled from his pocket several flat
masses that looked like pieces of yellow sponge. "This is pure gold. All
the quick has gone off, and this is the real stuff, just as good as
money. An ounce will buy sixteen dollars' worth of anything in Nome."

"It looks mighty pretty," said Ted. "Seems to me it's redder than any
gold I ever saw."

"It is," said his father. "Nome beach gold is redder and brighter than
any other Alaskan gold. I guess I'll have to get you each a piece for a
souvenir," and both boys were made happy by the present of a quaintly
shaped nugget, bought by Mr. Strong from the very miner who had mined
it, which of course added to its value.

"You're gathering quite a lot of souvenirs, Ted," said his father. "It's
a great relief that you have not asked me for anything alive yet. I have
been expecting a modest request for a Malamute or a Husky pup, or
perhaps a pet reindeer to take home, but so far you have been quite
moderate in your demands."

"Kalitan never asks for anything," said Ted. "I asked him once why it
was, and he said Indian boys never got what they asked for; that
sometimes they had things given to them that they hadn't asked for, but,
if he asked the Tyee for anything, all he got was 'Good Indian get
things for himself,' and he had to go to work to get the thing he
wanted. I guess it's a pretty good plan, too, for I notice that I get
just as much as I did when I used to tease you for things," Teddy added,
sagely.

"Wise boy," said his father. "You're certainly more agreeable to live
with. The next thing you are to have is a visit to an Esquimo village,
and, if I can find some of the Esquimo carvings, you shall have
something to take home to mother. Kalitan, what would you like to
remember the Esquimos by?"

Kalitan smiled and replied, simply, "_Mukluks_."

"What are _mukluks_?" demanded Ted.

"Esquimo moccasins," said Mr. Strong. "Well, you shall both have a pair,
and they are rather pretty things, too, as the Esquimos make them."

FOOTNOTE:

[14] The name given to the boggy soil of the beach.




CHAPTER XI

AFTERNOON TEA IN AN EGLU


THE Esquimo village was reached across the _tundra_, and Teddy and
Kalitan were much interested in the queer houses. Built for the long
winter of six or eight months, when it is impossible to do anything
out-of-doors, the _eglu_[15] seems quite comfortable from the Esquimo
point of view, but very strange to their American cousins.

"I thought the Esquimos lived in snow houses," said Ted, as they looked
at the queer little huts, and Kalitan exclaimed:

"Huh! Innuit queer Indian!"

"No," said Mr. Strong; "his hut is built by digging a hole about six
feet deep and standing logs up side by side around the hole. On the top
of these are placed logs which rest even with the ground. Stringers are
put across these, and other logs and moss and mud roofed over it,
leaving an opening in the middle about two feet square. This is covered
with a piece of walrus entrail so thin and transparent that light easily
passes through it, and it serves as a window, the only one they have. A
smoke-hole is cut through the roof, but there is no door, for the hut is
entered through another room built in the same way, fifteen or twenty
feet distant, and connected by an underground passage about two feet
square with the main room. The entrance-room is entered through a hole
in the roof, from which a ladder reaches the bottom of the passage."

"Can we go into a hut?" asked Ted.

"I'll ask that woman cooking over there," said Mr. Strong, as they went
up to a woman who was cooking over a peat fire, holding over the coals
an old battered skillet in which she was frying fish. She nodded and
smiled at the boys, and, as Esquimos are always friendly and hospitable
souls, told them to go right into her _eglu_, which was close by.

They climbed down the ladder, crawled along the narrow passage to where
a skin hung before an opening, and, pushing it aside, entered the
living-room. Here they found an old man busily engaged in carving a
walrus tooth, another sewing _mukluks_, while a girl was singing a
quaint lullaby to a child of two in the corner.

The young girl rose, and, putting the baby down on a pile of skins,
spoke to them in good English, saying quietly:

"You are welcome. I am Alalik."

"May we see your wares? We wish to buy," said Mr. Strong, courteously.

"You may see, whether you buy or not," she said, with a smile, which
showed a mouth full of even white teeth, and she spread out before them
a collection of Esquimo goods. There were all kinds of carvings from
walrus tusks, grass baskets, moccasins of walrus hide, stone bowls and
cups, _parkas_ made of reindeer skin, and one superb one of bird
feathers, _ramleikas_, and all manner of carved trinkets, the most
charming of which, to Ted's eyes, being a tiny _oomiak_ with an Esquimo
in it, made to be used as a breast-pin. This he bought for his mother,
and a carving of a baby for Judith; while his father made him and
Kalitan happy with presents.

"Where did you learn such English?" asked Mr. Strong of Alalik,
wondering, too, where she learned her pretty, modest ways, for Esquimo
women are commonly free and easy.

"I was for two years at the Mission at Holy Cross," she said. "There I
learned much that was good. Then my mother died, and I came home."

She spoke simply, and Mr. Strong wondered what would be the fate of this
sweet-faced girl.

"Did you learn to sew from the sisters?" asked Ted, who had been looking
at the garments she had made, in which the stitches, though made in
skins and sewn with deer sinew, were as even as though done with a
machine.

"Oh, no," she said. "We learn that at home. When I was no larger than
Zaksriner there, my mother taught me to braid thread from deer and whale
sinew, and we must sew very much in winter if we have anything to sell
when summer comes. It is very hard to get enough to live. Since the
Boston men come, our people waste the summer in idleness, so we have
nothing stored for the winter's food. Hundreds die and many sicknesses
come upon us. In the village where my people lived, in each house lay
the dead of what the Boston men called measles, and there were not left
enough living to bury the dead. Only we escaped, and a Black Gown came
from the Mission to help, and he took me and Antisarlook, my brother, to
the school. The rest came here, where we live very well because there
are in the summer, people who buy what we make in the winter."

"How do you get your skins so soft?" asked Ted, feeling the exquisite
texture of a bag she had just finished. It was a beautiful bit of work,
a tobacco-pouch or "Tee-rum-i-ute," made of reindeer skin, decorated
with beads and the soft creamy fur of the ermine in its summer hue.

"We scrape it a very long time and pull and rub," she said. "Plenty of
time for patience in winter."

"Your hands are too small and slim. I shouldn't think you could do much
with those stiff skins," said Teddy.

Alalik smiled at the compliment, and a little flush crept into the clear
olive of her skin. She was clean and neat, and the _eglu_, though close
from being shut up, was neater than most of the Esquimo houses. The bowl
filled with seal oil, which served as fire and light, was unlighted, and
Alalik's father motioned to her and said something in Innuit, to which
she smilingly replied:

"My father wishes you to eat with us," she said, and produced her flint
bag. In this were some wads of fibrous material used for wicks. Rolling
a piece of this in wood ashes, she held it between her thumb and a
flint, struck her steel against the stone, and sparks flew out which
lighted the fibre so that it burst into flame. This was thrown into the
bowl of oil, and she deftly began preparing tea. She served it in cups
of grass, and Ted thought he had never tasted anything nicer than the
cup of afternoon tea served in an _eglu_.

"Alalik, what were you singing as we came in?" asked Ted.

"A song my mother always sang to us," she replied. "It is called 'Ahmi,'
and is an Esquimo slumber song."

"Will you sing it now?" asked Mr. Strong, and she smiled in assent and
sang the quaint, crooning lullaby of her Esquimo mother--

  "The wind blows over the Yukon.
  My husband hunts the deer on the Koyukun Mountains,
  Ahmi, Ahmi, sleep, little one, wake not.
  Long since my husband departed. Why does he wait in the mountains?
  Ahmi, Ahmi, sleep, little one, softly.
  Where is my own?
  Does he lie starving on the hillside? Why does he linger?
  Comes he not soon, I will seek him among the mountains.
  Ahmi, Ahmi, sleep, little one, sleep.
  The crow has come laughing.
  His beak is red, his eyes glisten, the false one.
  'Thanks for a good meal to Kuskokala the Shaman.
  On the sharp mountain quietly lies your husband.'
  Ahmi, Ahmi, sleep, little one, wake not.
  'Twenty deers' tongues tied to the pack on his shoulders;
  Not a tongue in his mouth to call to his wife with,
  Wolves, foxes, and ravens are fighting for morsels.
  Tough and hard are the sinews, not so the child in your bosom.'
  Ahmi, Ahmi, sleep, little one, wake not.
  Over the mountains slowly staggers the hunter.
  Two bucks' thighs on his shoulders with bladders of fat between them.
  Twenty deers' tongues in his belt. Go, gather wood, old woman!
  Off flew the crow, liar, cheat, and deceiver!
  Wake, little sleeper, and call to your father.
  He brings you back fat, marrow and venison fresh from the mountain.
  Tired and worn, he has carved a toy of the deer's horn,
  While he was sitting and waiting long for the deer on the hillside.
  Wake, and see the crow hiding himself from the arrow,
  Wake, little one, wake, for here is your father."

Thanking Alalik for the quaint song, sung in a sweet, touching voice,
they all took their departure, laden with purchases and delighted with
their visit.

"But you must not think this is a fair sample of Esquimo hut or Esquimo
life," said Mr. Strong to the boys. "These are near enough civilized to
show the best side of their race, but theirs must be a terrible
existence who are inland or on islands where no one ever comes, and
whose only idea of life is a constant struggle for food."

"I think I would rather be an American," remarked Ted, while Kalitan
said, briefly:

"I like Thlinkit."

FOOTNOTES:

[15] The _eglu_ is the Esquimo house. Often they occupy tents during the
summer, but return to the huts the first cool nights.




CHAPTER XII

THE SPLENDOUR OF SAGHALIE TYEE


THE _tundra_ was greenish-brown in colour, and looked like a great
meadow stretching from the beach, like a new moon, gently upward to the
cones of volcanic mountains far away.

The ground, frozen solid all the year, thaws out for a foot or two on
the surface during the warm months, and here and there were scattered
wild flowers; spring beauties, purple primroses, yellow anemone, and
saxifrages bloomed in beauty, and wild honey-bees, gay bumblebees, and
fat mosquitoes buzzed and hummed everywhere.

Ted and Kalitan were going to see the reindeer farm at Port Clarence,
and, as this was to be their last jaunt in Alaska, they were determined
to make the best of it. Next day they were to take ship from Cape Prince
of Wales and go straight to Sitka. Here Ted was to start for home, and
Mr. Strong was to leave Kalitan at the Mission School for a year's
schooling, which, to Kalitan's great delight, was to be a present to him
from his American friends.

"Tell us about the reindeer farms, daddy. Have they always been here?"
demanded Ted, as they tramped over the _tundra_, covered with moss,
grass, and flowers.

"No," said his father. "They are quite recent arrivals in Alaska. The
Esquimos used to live entirely upon the game they killed before the
whites came. There were many walruses, which they used for many things;
whales, too, they could easily capture before the whalers drove them
north, and then they hunted the wild reindeer, until now there are
scarcely any left. There was little left for them to eat but small
fish, for you see the whites had taken away or destroyed their food
supplies.

"One day, in 1891, an American vessel discovered an entire village of
Esquimos starving, being reduced to eating their dogs, and it was
thought quite time that the government did something for these people
whose land they had bought. Finding that people of the same race in
Siberia were prosperous and healthy, they sent to investigate
conditions, and found that the Siberian Esquimos lived entirely by means
of the reindeer. The government decided to start a reindeer farm and see
if it would not benefit the natives."

"How does it work?" asked Ted.

"Very well, indeed," said his father. "At first about two hundred
animals were brought over, and they increased about fifty per cent. the
first year. Everywhere in the arctic region the _tundra_ gives the
reindeer the moss he lives on. It is never dry in summer because the
frost prevents any underground drainage, and even in winter the animals
feed upon it and thrive. There are, it is said, hundreds of thousands of
square miles of reindeer moss in Alaska, and reindeer stations have been
established in many places, and, as the natives are the only ones
allowed to raise them, it seems as if this might be the way found to
help the industrious Esquimos to help themselves."

"But if it all belongs to the government, how can it help the natives?"
asked Ted.

"Of course they have to be taught the business," said Mr. Strong. "The
government brought over some Lapps and Finlanders to care for the deer
at first, and these took young Esquimos to train. Each one serves five
years as herder, having a certain number of deer set apart for him each
year, and at the end of his service goes into business for himself."

"Why, I think that's fine," cried Ted. "Oh, Daddy, what is that? It
looks like a queer, tangled up forest, all bare branches in the
summer."

"That's a reindeer herd lying down for their noonday rest. What you see
are their antlers. How would you like to be in the midst of that forest
of branches?" asked Mr. Strong.

"No, thank you," said Teddy, but Kalitan said:

"Reindeer very gentle; they will not hurt unless very much frightened."

"What queer-looking animals they are," said Ted, as they approached
nearer. "A sort of a cross between a deer and a cow."

"Perhaps they are more useful than handsome, but I think there is
something picturesque about them, especially when hitched to sleds and
skimming over the frozen ground."

The farm at Teller was certainly an interesting spot. Teddy saw the deer
fed and milked, the Lapland women being experts in that line, and found
the herders, in their quaint _parkas_ tied around the waist, and
conical caps, scarcely less interesting than the deer. Two funny little
Lapp babies he took to ride on a large reindeer, which proceeding did
not frighten the babies half so much as did the white boy who put them
on the deer. A reindeer was to them an every-day occurrence, but a
Boston boy was quite another matter.

[Illustration: "TWO FUNNY LITTLE LAPP BABIES HE TOOK TO RIDE ON A LARGE
REINDEER."]

Better than the reindeer, however, Teddy and Kalitan liked the draught
dogs who hauled the water at the station. A great cask on wheels was
pulled by five magnificent dogs, beautiful fellows with bright alert
faces.

"They are the most faithful creatures in the world," said Mr. Strong,
"devoted to their masters, even though the masters are cruel to them.
Reindeer can work all day without a mouthful to eat, living on one meal
at night of seven pounds of corn-meal mush, with a pound or so of dried
fish cooked into it. On long journeys they can live on dried fish and
snow, and five dogs will haul four hundred pounds thirty-five miles a
day. They carry the United States mails all over Alaska."

"I should think the dog would be worth more than the reindeer," said
Ted.

"Many Alaskan travellers say he is by far the best for travelling, but
he cannot feed himself on the _tundra_, nor can he be eaten himself if
necessary. The Jarvis expedition proved the value of the reindeer," said
Mr. Strong.

"What was that?" asked Ted.

"Some years ago a whale fleet was caught in the ice near Point Barrow,
and in danger of starving to death, and word of this was sent to the
government. The President ordered the revenue cutter _Bear_ to go as far
north as possible and send a relief party over the ice by sledge with
provisions.

"When the _Bear_ could go no farther, her commander landed Lieutenant
Jarvis, who was familiar with the region, and a relief party. They were
to seek the nearest reindeer station and drive a reindeer herd to the
relief of the starving people. The party reached Cape Nome and secured
some deer, and the rescue was made, but under such difficulties that it
is one of the most heroic stories of the age. These men drove four
hundred reindeer over two thousand miles north of the Arctic Circle,
over frozen seas and snow-covered mountains, and found the starving
sailors, who ate the fresh reindeer meat, which lasted until the ice
melted in the spring and set them free."

"I think that was fine," said Ted. "But it seems a little hard on the
reindeer, doesn't it, to tramp all that distance just to be eaten?"

"Animals made for man," said Kalitan, briefly.

       *       *       *       *       *

A golden glory filled the sky, running upwards toward the zenith,
spreading there in varying colours from palest yellow to orange and
deepest, richest red. Glowing streams of light streamed heavenward like
feathery wings, as Ted and Kalitan sailed southward, and Ted exclaimed
in wonder: "What is it?"

"The splendour of _Saghalie Tyee_,"[16] said Kalitan, solemnly.

"The Aurora Borealis," said Mr. Strong, "and very fortunate you are to
see it. Indeed, Teddy, you seem to have brought good luck, for
everything has gone well this trip. Our faces are turned homeward now,
but we will have to come again next summer and bring mother and Judith."

"I'll be glad to get home to mother again," said Ted, then noting
Kalitan's wistful face, "We'll find you at Sitka and go home with you to
the island," and he put his arm affectionately over the Indian boy's
shoulder. Kalitan pointed to the sky, whence the splendour was fading,
and a flock of birds was skimming southwards.

"From the sky fades the splendour of _Saghalie Tyee_," he said. "The
summer is gone, the birds fly southward. The light goes from me when my
White Brother goes with the birds. Unless he return with them, all is
dark for Kalitan!"


THE END.

FOOTNOTE:

[16] Way-up High Chief, i.e., God.




THE LITTLE COUSIN SERIES


The most delightful and interesting accounts possible of child life in
other lands, filled with quaint sayings, doings, and adventures.

Each one vol., 12mo, decorative cover, cloth, with six or more full-page
illustrations in color.

    Price per volume      $0.60


_By MARY HAZELTON WADE_ (_unless otherwise indicated_)

    =Our Little African Cousin=
    =Our Little Alaskan Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Arabian Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Armenian Cousin=
    =Our Little Brown Cousin=
    =Our Little Canadian Cousin=
        By Elizabeth R. Macdonald
    =Our Little Chinese Cousin=
        By Isaac Taylor Headland
    =Our Little Cuban Cousin=
    =Our Little Dutch Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little English Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Eskimo Cousin=
    =Our Little French Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little German Cousin=
    =Our Little Hawaiian Cousin=
    =Our Little Hindu Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Indian Cousin=
    =Our Little Irish Cousin=
    =Our Little Italian Cousin=
    =Our Little Japanese Cousin=
    =Our Little Jewish Cousin=
    =Our Little Korean Cousin=
        By H. Lee M. Pike
    =Our Little Mexican Cousin=
        By Edward C. Butler
    =Our Little Norwegian Cousin=
    =Our Little Panama Cousin=
        By H. Lee M. Pike
    =Our Little Philippine Cousin=
    =Our Little Porto Rican Cousin=
    =Our Little Russian Cousin=
    =Our Little Scotch Cousin=
        By Blanche McManus
    =Our Little Siamese Cousin=
    =Our Little Spanish Cousin=
        By Mary F. Nixon-Roulet
    =Our Little Swedish Cousin=
        By Claire M. Coburn
    =Our Little Swiss Cousin=
    =Our Little Turkish Cousin=




THE GOLDENROD LIBRARY


The Goldenrod Library contains stories which appeal alike both to
children and to their parents and guardians.

Each volume is well illustrated from drawings by competent artists,
which, together with their handsomely decorated uniform binding, showing
the goldenrod, usually considered the emblem of America, is a feature of
their manufacture.

    Each one volume, small 12mo, illustrated      $0.35


LIST OF TITLES

    =Aunt Nabby's Children.=  By Frances Hodges White.
    =Child's Dream of a Star, The.=  By Charles Dickens.
    =Flight of Rosy Dawn, The.=  By Pauline Bradford Mackie.
    =Findelkind.=  By Ouida.
    =Fairy of the Rhone, The.=  By A. Comyns Carr.
    =Gatty and I.=  By Frances E. Crompton.
    =Helena's Wonderworld.=  By Frances Hodges White.
    =Jerry's Reward.=  By Evelyn Snead Barnett.
    =La Belle Nivernaise.=  By Alphonse Daudet.
    =Little King Davie.=  By Nellie Hellis.
    =Little Peterkin Vandike.=  By Charles Stuart Pratt.
    =Little Professor, The.=  By Ida Horton Cash.
    =Peggy's Trial.=  By Mary Knight Potter.
    =Prince Yellowtop.=  By Kate Whiting Patch.
    =Provence Rose, A.=  By Ouida.
    =Seventh Daughter, A.=  By Grace Wickham Curran.
    =Sleeping Beauty, The.=  By Martha Baker Dunn.
    =Small, Small Child, A.=  By E. Livingston Prescott.
    =Susanne.=  By Frances J. Delano.
    =Water People, The.=  By Charles Lee Sleight.
    =Young Archer, The.=  By Charles E. Brimblecom.




COSY CORNER SERIES

      It is the intention of the publishers that this series
      shall contain only the very highest and purest
      literature,--stories that shall not only appeal to the
      children themselves, but be appreciated by all those
      who feel with them in their joys and sorrows.

      The numerous illustrations in each book are by
      well-known artists, and each volume has a separate
      attractive cover design.

    Each 1 vol., 16mo, cloth       $0.50


_By ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON_


=The Little Colonel.= (Trade Mark.)

The scene of this story is laid in Kentucky. Its heroine is a small
girl, who is known as the Little Colonel, on account of her fancied
resemblance to an old-school Southern gentleman, whose fine estate and
old family are famous in the region.


=The Giant Scissors.=

This is the story of Joyce and of her adventures in France. Joyce is a
great friend of the Little Colonel, and in later volumes shares with her
the delightful experiences of the "House Party" and the "Holidays."


=Two Little Knights of Kentucky.=

WHO WERE THE LITTLE COLONEL'S NEIGHBORS.

In this volume the Little Colonel returns to us like an old friend, but
with added grace and charm. She is not, however, the central figure of
the story, that place being taken by the "two little knights."


=Mildred's Inheritance.=

A delightful little story of a lonely English girl who comes to America
and is befriended by a sympathetic American family who are attracted by
her beautiful speaking voice. By means of this one gift she is enabled
to help a school-girl who has temporarily lost the use of her eyes, and
thus finally her life becomes a busy, happy one.


=Cicely and Other Stories for Girls.=

The readers of Mrs. Johnston's charming juveniles will be glad to learn
of the issue of this volume for young people.


=Aunt 'Liza's Hero and Other Stories.=

A collection of six bright little stories, which will appeal to all boys
and most girls.

=Big Brother.=

A story of two boys. The devotion and care of Steven, himself a small
boy, for his baby brother, is the theme of the simple tale.


=Ole Mammy's Torment.=

"Ole Mammy's Torment" has been fitly called "a classic of Southern
life." It relates the haps and mishaps of a small negro lad, and tells
how he was led by love and kindness to a knowledge of the right.


=The Story of Dago.=

In this story Mrs. Johnston relates the story of Dago, a pet monkey,
owned jointly by two brothers. Dago tells his own story, and the account
of his haps and mishaps is both interesting and amusing.


=The Quilt That Jack Built.=

A pleasant little story of a boy's labor of love, and how it changed the
course of his life many years after it was accomplished.


=Flip's Islands of Providence.=

A story of a boy's life battle, his early defeat, and his final triumph,
well worth the reading.


_By EDITH ROBINSON_


=A Little Puritan's First Christmas.=

A Story of Colonial times in Boston, telling how Christmas was invented
by Betty Sewall, a typical child of the Puritans, aided by her brother
Sam.


=A Little Daughter of Liberty.=

The author introduces this story as follows:

"One ride is memorable in the early history of the American Revolution,
the well-known ride of Paul Revere. Equally deserving of commendation is
another ride,--the ride of Anthony Severn,--which was no less historic
in its action or memorable in its consequences."


=A Loyal Little Maid.=

A delightful and interesting story of Revolutionary days, in which the
child heroine, Betsey Schuyler, renders important services to George
Washington.


=A Little Puritan Rebel.=

This is an historical tale of a real girl, during the time when the
gallant Sir Harry Vane was governor of Massachusetts.


=A Little Puritan Pioneer.=

The scene of this story is laid in the Puritan settlement at
Charlestown.


=A Little Puritan Bound Girl.=

A story of Boston in Puritan days, which is of great interest to
youthful readers.


=A Little Puritan Cavalier.=

The story of a "Little Puritan Cavalier" who tried with all his boyish
enthusiasm to emulate the spirit and ideals of the dead Crusaders.


=A Puritan Knight Errant.=

The story tells of a young lad in Colonial times who endeavored to carry
out the high ideals of the knights of olden days.


_By OUIDA_ (_Louise de la Ramee_)


=A Dog of Flanders=: A CHRISTMAS STORY.

Too well and favorably known to require description.


=The Nurnberg Stove.=

This beautiful story has never before been published at a popular price.


_By FRANCES MARGARET FOX_


=The Little Giant's Neighbours.=

A charming nature story of a "little giant" whose neighbours were the
creatures of the field and garden.


=Farmer Brown and the Birds.=

A little story which teaches children that the birds are man's best
friends.


=Betty of Old Mackinaw.=

A charming story of child-life, appealing especially to the little
readers who like stories of "real people."


=Brother Billy.=

The story of Betty's brother, and some further adventures of Betty
herself.


=Mother Nature's Little Ones.=

Curious little sketches describing the early lifetime, or "childhood,"
of the little creatures out-of-doors.


=How Christmas Came to the Mulvaneys.=

A bright, lifelike little story of a family of poor children, with an
unlimited capacity for fun and mischief. The wonderful never-to-be
forgotten Christmas that came to them is the climax of a series of
exciting incidents.


_By MISS MULOCK_


=The Little Lame Prince.=

A delightful story of a little boy who has many adventures by means of
the magic gifts of his fairy god-mother.


=Adventures of a Brownie.=

The story of a household elf who torments the cook and gardener, but is
a constant joy and delight to the children who love and trust him.


=His Little Mother.=

Miss Mulock's short stories for children are a constant source of
delight to them, and "His Little Mother," in this new and attractive
dress, will be welcomed by hosts of youthful readers.


=Little Sunshine's Holiday.=

An attractive story of a summer outing. "Little Sunshine" is another of
those beautiful child-characters for which Miss Mulock is so justly
famous.


_By MARSHALL SAUNDERS_


=For His Country.=

A sweet and graceful story of a little boy who loved his country;
written with that charm which has endeared Miss Saunders to hosts of
readers.


=Nita, the Story of an Irish Setter.=

In this touching little book, Miss Saunders shows how dear to her heart
are all of God's dumb creatures.


=Alpatok, the Story of an Eskimo Dog.=

Alpatok, an Eskimo dog from the far north, was stolen from his master
and left to starve in a strange city, but was befriended and cared for,
until he was able to return to his owner.


_By WILL ALLEN DROMGOOLE_


=The Farrier's Dog and His Fellow.=

This story, written by the gifted young Southern woman, will appeal to
all that is best in the natures of the many admirers of her graceful and
piquant style.


=The Fortunes of the Fellow.=

Those who read and enjoyed the pathos and charm of "The Farrier's Dog
and His Fellow" will welcome the further account of the adventures of
Baydaw and the Fellow at the home of the kindly smith.


=The Best of Friends.=

This continues the experiences of the Farrier's dog and his Fellow,
written in Miss Dromgoole's well-known charming style.


=Down in Dixie.=

A fascinating story for boys and girls, of a family of Alabama children
who move to Florida and grow up in the South.


_By MARIAN W. WILDMAN_


=Loyalty Island.=

An account of the adventures of four children and their pet dog on an
island, and how they cleared their brother from the suspicion of
dishonesty.


=Theodore and Theodora.=

This is a story of the exploits and mishaps of two mischievous twins,
and continues the adventures of the interesting group of children in
"Loyalty Island."


_By CHARLES G. D. ROBERTS_


=The Cruise of the Yacht Dido.=

The story of two boys who turned their yacht into a fishing boat to earn
money to pay for a college course, and of their adventures while
exploring in search of hidden treasure.


=The Young Acadian.=

The story of a young lad of Acadia who rescued a little English girl
from the hands of savages.


=The Lord of the Air.=

THE STORY OF THE EAGLE

=The King of the Mamozekel.=

THE STORY OF THE MOOSE

=The Watchers of the Camp-fire.=

THE STORY OF THE PANTHER

=The Haunter of the Pine Gloom.=

THE STORY OF THE LYNX

=The Return to the Trails.=

THE STORY OF THE BEAR

=The Little People of the Sycamore.=

THE STORY OF THE RACCOON


_By OTHER AUTHORS_


=The Great Scoop.=

_By MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL_

A capital tale of newspaper life in a big city, and of a bright,
enterprising, likable youngster employed thereon.


=John Whopper.=

The late Bishop Clark's popular story of the boy who fell through the
earth and came out in China, with a new introduction by Bishop Potter.


=The Dole Twins.=

_By KATE UPSON CLARK_

The adventures of two little people who tried to earn money to buy
crutches for a lame aunt. An excellent description of child-life about
1812, which will greatly interest and amuse the children of to-day,
whose life is widely different.


=Larry Hudson's Ambition.=

_By JAMES OTIS_, author of "Toby Tyler," etc.

Larry Hudson is a typical American boy, whose hard work and enterprise
gain him his ambition,--an education and a start in the world.


=The Little Christmas Shoe.=

_By JANE P. SCOTT WOODRUFF_

A touching story of Yule-tide.


=Wee Dorothy.=

_By LAURA UPDEGRAFF_

A story of two orphan children, the tender devotion of the eldest, a
boy, for his sister being its theme and setting. With a bit of sadness
at the beginning, the story is otherwise bright and sunny, and
altogether wholesome in every way.


=The King of the Golden River=: A LEGEND OF STIRIA. _By JOHN RUSKIN_

Written fifty years or more ago, and not originally intended for
publication, this little fairy-tale soon became known and made a place
for itself.


=A Child's Garden of Verses.=

_By R. L. STEVENSON_

Mr. Stevenson's little volume is too well known to need description.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. Text uses both kyak and kiak for
our more modern kayak. This was retained.

Final page of book ads, "L. R." changed to "R. L." (By R. L. Stevenson)

Page 5, "alway" changed to "always" (always dear to a boy)

Page 82, "Tahgeah" changed to "Tah-ge-ah" (Tah-ge-ah would take them)

Page 83, "Kalakash" changed to "Kala-kash" (Kala-kash had not asked)






End of Project Gutenberg's Our Little Alaskan Cousin, by Mary F. Nixon-Roulet

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR LITTLE ALASKAN COUSIN ***

***** This file should be named 10224.txt or 10224.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/2/10224/

Produced by Emmy, Beth Baran, Juliet Sutherland, Mary
Meehan, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
