Project Gutenberg's Travels in Morocco, Vol. 1., by James Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Travels in Morocco, Vol. 1.

Author: James Richardson

Release Date: December 1, 2003 [EBook #10355]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS IN MOROCCO, VOL. 1. ***




Produced by Carlo Traverso, Tom Allen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team from images generously made available
by the Bibliotheque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr.





TRAVELS IN MOROCCO,

BY THE LATE JAMES RICHARDSON,

AUTHOR OF "A MISSION TO CENTRAL AFRICA,"
"TRAVELS IN THE DESERT OF SAHARA," &C.

EDITED BY HIS WIDOW.

[Illustration]

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.




INTRODUCTION.


Having made a limited tour in the Empire of Morocco a few years since, I
am enabled to appreciate the information imparted to us by the lamented
Richardson, and am desirous of adding a few observations of my own upon
the present state of affairs in that part of the African Continent.

The following work of the indefatigable traveller demands, at the
present moment, a more than ordinary share of public attention, in
consequence of the momentous events now passing in the Straits of
Gibraltar, where the presence of powerful armaments entails on the
Governor of our great rock-fortress, a duty of some delicacy, situated
as he now is in close proximity to three belligerent powers, all of whom
are at peace with Great Britain. But distinguished alike for common
sense and professional ability, Sir William Codrington, it is to be
hoped, will steer clear of the follies committed by Sir Robert Wilson in
1844, and will command respect for the British name, without provoking
bitter feelings between ourselves, and our French and Spanish
neighbours.

It is scarcely possible that either France or Spain can contemplate the
conquest of the entire Empire of Morocco, as the result of the present
impending crisis, the superficial extent of the territory being 219,420
square miles, and the population nearly 8,000,000, [1] of which a large
proportion live in a state of perpetual warfare, occupying inaccessible
mountain fastnesses, from whence they only descend to the plains for the
sake of plunder. The inhabitants may be classified as follows: 4,000,000
Moors and Arabs; 2,000,000 Berbers; 500,000 Jews, and the remainder are
of the Negro race. The regular Army consists of less than thirty
thousand men, but every Arab is an expert irregular horseman, and the
Berbers make good foot-soldiers.

These indeed are, in ordinary times, rarely to be depended on by the
Emperor, but so powerful an incentive is religious fanaticism that, were
he to raise the standard of the Holy War, a large Army would quickly
rally around him, deficient perhaps in discipline, yet living by
plunder, and marching without the encumbrance of baggage, it would prove
a formidable opponent.

Let us, however, suppose, that the present action of France and Spain
should result in the subversion of the atrocious system of Government
practised in Morocco: a guarantee from the conquerors that our existing
commercial privileges should be respected, would alone be required to
ensure the protection of our interests, and what an extended field would
the facilities for penetrating into the interior open to us! We must
also remember that Napoleon III. in heart, is a free-trader; and, should
Destiny ever appoint him the arbiter of Morocco, the protectionist
pressure of a certain deluded class in France would be impotent against
his policy in Western Barbary, a country perhaps more hostile to the
European than China. Sailors and others, who have had the misfortune to
be cast on the inhospitable shore of Northern Africa, have been sent far
inland into slavery to drag out a miserable existence; and, at this
moment, there are many white Christian slaves in the southern and
eastern provinces of the Empire.

Should the war not result in conquest, the least we have a right to
expect, is that toleration should be forced upon the Moors, and that
European capital and labour should be allowed a free development
throughout their Empire. A flourishing trade would soon spring up,
nature having blessed Barbary with an excellent soil and climate,
besides vast mineral wealth in its mountains; lead, copper, and antimony
are found in them. The plains produce corn, rice, and indigo; the
forests of cedar, ilex, cork, and olive-trees are scattered over a vast
extent, and contain antelopes, wild bears, and other species of game;
Barbary also possesses an excellent breed of horses. The principal
manufactures are leather, shawls and carpets.

England has, but a short time since, succeeded in emancipating her
Jewish brethren from their few remaining disabilities; an opportunity
may now be at hand, of ameliorating the condition of those in the Empire
of Morocco, who are forced to submit to a grinding persecution, and are
merely tolerated because they are useful. They supply many wants of the
Moorish population; are the best, and in many handicrafts, the only
artificers, and are much employed by the government in financial
occupations. They are compelled to occupy a distinct quarter of the town
they inhabit; are permitted only to wear black garments, are forbidden
to ride, the horse being considered too noble an animal to carry a Jew,
and are forced to take off their shoes on passing a mosque. Even the
little Moorish boys strike and ill-treat them in various ways, and the
slightest attempt at retaliation was formerly punished with death, and
would now be visited with the bastinado. They are more heavily taxed
than any other class, and special contributions are often levied on
them.

Alas! why should we respect the national existence of any community of
Mahometans? Have we effaced from our memory their treachery and inhuman
cruelty in India; their utter worthlessness in Turkey; their neglect in
taking advantage of the richness with which nature has blest the
countries in their possession; and their conquest from Christendom of
one of the fairest portions of Europe.

Civilization cries aloud for retribution on a race whose religion
teaches them to regard us as "dogs." Surely, far from protecting and
cherishing, we should hunt them out of the fair lands they occupy, and
force them back on the deserts which vomited them forth on our ancestors
ten centuries ago. Brief periods of glory at Bagdad, Cairo, and Granada,
should not protect those who are now slaves to the lowest vices that
degrade human nature. No administrative reforms are at all practicable;
their moral maladies have attacked the vital element; the sole cure is
conquest, and the substitution of Christian Governments in Northern
Africa, and Turkey in Europe and Asia. Russia, France, Austria, Greece,
and Spain are weary of the excesses of their savage neighbours; none can
be honestly inclined to stay their avenging swords.

I have, in these prefatory remarks, extracted a few particulars from the
short chapter on Morocco, contained in my work on the "French in
Africa," and in advocating a crusade against the Mahometan races, I
believe I am recording the sentiments of millions of Europeans.

It now only remains for me to give expression to that universal feeling
of regret which prevails among my countrymen at the untimely fate of
poor Richardson, and to offer my congratulations that he has bequeathed
to us so pleasing an addition to his former works as the following
narrative of his "Travels in Morocco."

  L. TRENT CAVE, F.R.G.S.
  Author of "The French in Africa."

  Army and Navy Club,
  November, 1859.




PREFACE.


The present unsettled state of affairs in Morocco, in consequence of the
War in which she is now engaged with her more powerful and ancient
enemy--Spain, must, I conceive, render any information regarding a
region so little known peculiarly acceptable at the present moment.

In Morocco, my late husband laboured to advance the same objects which
had previously taken him to Central Africa, viz., the amelioration of
the condition of the strange and remarkable races of men who inhabit
that part of the world. He aimed at the introduction of a legitimate
commerce with a view, in the first instance, to destroy the horrible and
revolting trade in slaves, and thus pave the way for the diffusion of
Christianity among a benighted people. While travelling, with these high
purposes in contemplation, he neglected no opportunity of studying the
geography of the country, and of obtaining an insight into the manners,
customs, prejudices, and sentiments of its inhabitants, as well as any
other useful information in relation to it.

I accompanied him on his travels in Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, in
which last city he left me, it not being considered advisable that I
should proceed with him into the interior of the country. We were not
destined to meet again in this world. My beloved husband died at Bornou,
in Central Africa, whither he was sent by Her Majesty's Government to
enter into treaties with the chiefs of the surrounding districts.

Of the many difficulties and dangers which the traveller is likely to
encounter in penetrating into the interior of so inhospitable a region,
the reader may form some idea by a perusal of the the following extracts
from my husband's writings.

"I am very much of opinion that in African travel we should take
especial care not to attempt too much at once; that we should proceed
very slowly, feeling our way, securing ourselves against surprise, and
reducing and confining our explorations to the record of matters of fact
as far as possible, or consistently with a due illustration of the
narrative. But, whether we attempt great tours, or short journeyings, we
shall soon find, by our own sad experience, that African travel can only
be successfully prosecuted piecemeal, bit by bit, here a little and
there a little, now an island, now a line of coast, now an inland
province, now a patch of desert, and slow and painful in all their
results, whilst few explorers will ever be able to undertake more than
two, at most three, inland journeys.

"Failures, disasters, and misadventure may attend our efforts of
discovery; the intrepid explorers may perish, as they have so frequently
done, or be scalped by the Indian savage in the American wilderness, or
stabbed by the treacherous Bedouin of Asiatic deserts, or be stretched
stiff in the icy dreary Polar circles, or, succumbing to the burning
clime of Africa, leave their bones to bleach upon its arid sandy wastes;
yet these victims of enterprise will add more to a nation's glory than
its hoarded heaps of gold, or the great gains of its commerce, or even
the valour of its arms.

"Nevertheless, geographical discovery is not barren ardour, or wasted
enthusiasm; it produces substantial fruits. The fair port of London,
with its two parallel forests of masts, bears witness to the rich and
untold treasures which result from the traffic of our merchant-fleets
with the isles and continents discovered by the genius and enterprise of
the maritime or inland explorer. And, finally, we have always in view
the complete regeneration of the world, by our laws, our learning, and
our religion. If every valley is to be raised, and every mountain laid
low, by the spade and axe of industry, guided by science, the valley or
the mountain must first be discovered.

"If men are to be civilized, they must first be found; and if other, or
the remaining tribes of the inhabitable earth are to acknowledge the
true God, and accept His favour as known to us, they also, with
ourselves, must have an opportunity of hearing His name pronounced, and
His will declared."

My husband would, indeed, have rejoiced had he lived to witness the
active steps now taken by Oxford and Cambridge for sending out
Missionaries to Central Africa, to spread the light of the Gospel.

Among his unpublished letters, I find one addressed to the Christian
Churches, entitled "Project for the establishment of a Christian Mission
at Bornou," dated October, 1849. He writes: "The Christian Churches have
left Central Africa now these twelve centuries in the hands of the
Mohammedans, who, in different countries, have successfully propagated
the false doctrines of the impostor of Mecca. If the Christian Churches
wish to vindicate the honour of their religion--to diffuse its
beneficent and heavenly doctrines--and to remove from themselves the
severe censure of having abandoned Central Africa to the false prophet,
I believe there is now an opening, _via_ Bornou, to attempt the
establishment of their faith in the heart of Africa."

He ends his paper by quoting the words of Ignatius Pallme, a Bohemian,
the writer of travels in Kordofan, who says "It is high time for the
Missionary Societies in Europe to direct their attention to this part of
Africa (that is, Kordofan). If they delay much longer, it will be too
late; for, when the negroes have once adopted the Koran, no power on
earth can induce them to change their opinions. I have heard, through
several authentic sources, that there are few provinces in the interior
of Africa where Mohammedanism has not already begun to gain a footing."

It would be a great solace to me should this work be received
favourably, and be deemed to reflect honour on the memory of my lamented
husband; and, in the hope that such may be the case, I venture to commit
it into the hands of an indulgent public.

  J.E. RICHARDSON.

  London,
  November 15, 1859.




CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME


INTRODUCTION

PREFACE

CHAPTER I.

Policy of the Court of Morocco.--Its strength.--Diploplomatic Intercourse
with England.--Distrust of Europeans.--Commercial Relations.

CHAPTER II.

Arrival at Tangier.--Moorish Pilgrims in Cordova.--Address of the
Anti-Slavery Society.--Mr. D. Hay, British Consul.--Institut
d'Afrique.--Conveyance of Eunuchs in vessels under the French
Flag.--Franco-Moorish Politics.--Corn Monopolies in Morocco.--Love and
veneration for the English name--Celebration of the Ayd-Kebir, or great
festival.--Value of Money in Morocco.--Juvenile Strolling
Singer.--General account of the city of Tangier.--Intercourse between
the Moorish Emperor and the Foreign Consuls.--Cockney sportsmen.--The
degrading of high Moorish Functionaries.--How we smuggle Cattle from
Tangier to Gibraltar.--The Blood-letting of plethoric Placemen.

CHAPTER III.

The Posada.--Ingles and Benoliel.--Amulets for successful
parturition.--Visits of a Moorish Taleb and a Berber.--Three Sundays
during a week in Barbary.--M. Rey's account of the Empire of
Morocco.--The Government Auctioneer gives an account of Slavery and the
Slave Trade in Morocco.--Benoliel as English Cicerone.--Departure from
Tangier to Gibraltar.--How I lost my fine green broad-cloth.--Mr.
Frenerry's opinion of Maroquine Affairs.

CHAPTER IV.

Departure from Gibraltar to Mogador.--The Straits.--Genoese
Sailors.--Trade-wind Hurricanes on the Atlantic Coast of
Morocco.--Difficulties of entering the Port of Mogador.--Bad
provisioning of Foreign Merchantmen.--The present Representative of the
once far-famed and dreaded Rovers.--Disembarkation at Mogador.--Mr.
Phillips, Captain of the Port.--Rumours amongst the People about my
Mission.--Visit to the Cemeteries.--Maroquine Wreckers.--Health of the
inhabitants of Mogador.--Moorish Cavaliers "playing at powder" composed
of the ancient Numidians.--The Barb.--The Life Guards of the Moorish
Emperor.--Martial character of the Negro.--Some account of the Black
Corps of the Shereefs.--Orthodoxy of the Shereefs, and illustrative
anecdotes of the various Emperors.

CHAPTER V.

Several visits from the Moors; their ideas on soldiers and payment of
public functionaries.--Mr. Cohen and his opinion on Maroquine affairs.--
Phlebotomising of Governors, and Ministerial responsibility.--Border
Travels of the Shedma and Hhaha tribes.--How the Emperor enriches
himself by the quarrels of his subjects.--Message from the Emperor
respecting the Anti-Slavery Address.--Difficulties of travelling through
or residing in the Interior.--Use of Knives, and Forks, and Chairs are
signs of Social Progress.--Account of the periodical visit of the
Mogador Merchants to the Emperor, in the Southern Capital.

CHAPTER VI.

Influence of French Consuls.--Arrival of the Governor of Mogador from
the Capital; he brings an order to imprison the late Governor; his
character, and mode of administering affairs.--Statue of a Negress at
the bottom of a well.--Spanish Renegades.--Various Wedding Festivals of
Jews.--Frequent Fetes and Feastings among the Jewish population of
Morocco.--Scripture Illustration, "Behold the Bridegroom
cometh!"--Jewish Renegades.--How far women have souls.--Infrequency of
Suicides.

CHAPTER VII.

Interview with the Governor of Mogador, on the Address of the Anti-Slavery
Society.--Day and night side of the Mission Adventure.--Phillips'
application to be allowed to stand with his "shoes on" before the
Shereefian presence.--Case of the French Israelite, Darmon, who was
killed by the Government.--Order of the Government against Europeans
smoking in the streets.--Character of Haj Mousa, Governor of
Mazagran.--Talmudical of a Sousee Jew.--False weights amongst the
Mogador Merchants.--Rumours of war from the North, and levy of
troops.--Bragadocio of the Governor.--Mr. Authoris's opinion on the
state of of the Country.--Moorish opinions on English Abolition.--
European Slavery in Southern Morocco.--Spanish Captives and the London
Ironmongers Company.--Sentiments of Barbary Jews on Slavery.




ILLUSTRATIONS.


VOL. I.

Interior of a Moorish House

City of Tangier

Port of Mogador

Christian Burial Place

Moorish Cemetery

Nubian Cavalry of Ancient Africa

Wadnoun


VOL. II.

The Snake-Charmer

City of Morocco

Fish found in Hot Springs

Water-Snake

The Aoudad




TRAVELS IN MOROCCO.




CHAPTER I.

Policy of the Court of Morocco.--Its strength.--Diplomatic Intercourse
with England.--Distrust of Europeans.--Commercial Relations.


Morocco is the China of North Africa. The grand political maxim of the
Shereefian Court is, the exclusion of strangers; to look upon all
strangers with distrust and suspicion; and should they, at any time,
attempt to explore the interior of Morocco, or any of the adjacent
counties, to thwart and circumvent their enterprise, is a veritable feat
of statesmanship in the opinion of the Shereefian Court. The
assassination of Mr. Davidson, some years since, is an odious and
enduring stigma on the Moorish Court, notwithstanding the various
efforts which have been made to deny the personal responsibility of the
Emperor in that transaction.

The Prince de Joinville was once going to open Morocco, as we opened
China; but bullets and shot which his Royal Highness showered upon
Tangier and Mogador, only closed faster the approaches and routes of
this well-guarded empire--only more hermetically sealed the capitals of
Fez and Morocco against the prying or morbid curiosity of the tourist,
or the mappings and measurings of the political spy. The striking
anecdote, illustrating the exclusive policy of the Maroquine Court, is
familiar to all who have read the history of the Moorish Sultans of the
Mugreb. Years ago, a European squadron threatened to bombard Tangier,
unless their demands were instantly satisfied; and the then reigning
Sultan sent down from Fez this imperial message:

"How much will the enemy give me if I myself burn to ashes my
well-beloved city of Tangier? Tell the enemy, O governor of the mighty
city of Tangier, that I can reduce this self-same city to a heap of
smoking ruins, at a much cheaper rate than he can, with all his ships,
his warlike machines, and his fighting men."

The strength of Morocco lies in her internal cities, her inland
population, and the natural difficulties of her territory; about her
coast she cares little; but the French did not find this out till after
their bombardments. The unwonted discovery led them afterwards to boast
that they had at length opened Morocco by the other and opposite system
of a pacific mission. The parties forming the mission, pretended to have
obtained from the Emperor permission for Europeans "to travel in Morocco
without let or hindrance whithersoever they will." But the opposition
press justly ridiculed the pretensions of the alleged concession, as the
precarious and barren result of a mission costing several million of
francs. Even an Englishman, but much more a Frenchman--and the latter is
especially hated and dreaded in all the Maroquine provinces, would have
considerably hesitated in placing confidence in the safe conduct of this
jealous Court.

The spirit of the Christian West, which has invaded the most secret
councils of the Eastern world, Persia, Turkey, and all the countries
subjected to Ottoman rule, is still excluded by the haughty Shereefs of
the Mahometan West. There is scarcely any communication between the port
and the court of the Shereefs, and the two grand masters of orthodox
Islamism, this of the West, and that of the East, are nearly strangers
to each other.

All that Muley Errahman has to do with the East, appears to be to
procure eunuchs and Abyssinian concubines for his harem from Egypt, and
send forward his most faithful, or most rebellious subjects [2] on their
pilgrimage to Mecca.

Englishmen are surprised, that the frequent visits and uninterrupted
communications between Morocco and Gibraltar, during so long a period,
should have produced scarcely a perceptible change in the minds of the
Moors, and that Western Barbary should be a century behind Tunis. This
circumstance certainly does not arise from any inherent inaptitude in
the Moorish character to entertain friendly relations with Europeans,
and can only have resulted from that crouching and subservient policy
which the Gibraltar authorities have always judged it expedient to show
towards the Maroquines.

Our diplomatic intercourse began with Morocco in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth; and though on friendly terms more or less ever since,
Englishmen have not yet obtained a recognised permission to travel in
the interior of the country, without first specially applying to its
Government. Our own countrymen know little of Morocco, or of its
inhabitants, customs, laws, and government; and, though only five or six
days sail from England, it must be regarded as an unknown and unexplored
region to the mass of the English nation.

Nevertheless, in spite of the Maroquine Empire being the most
conservative and unchangeable of all North African Mussulman states, and
whilst, happily for itself, it has been allowed to pursue its course
obscurely and noiselessly, without exciting particular attention in
Europe, or being involved in the wars and commotions of European
nations, Morocco is not, therefore, beyond the reach of changes and the
ravages of time, nor exempt from that mutability which is impressed upon
all sublunary states. The bombardments of Tangier and Mogador have left
behind them traces not easily to be effaced. It was no ordinary event
for Morocco to carry on hostilities with an European power.

The battle of Isly has deeply wounded the Shereefians, and incited the
Mussulman heart to sullen and unquenchable revenge. A change has come
over the Maroquine mind, which, as to its immediate effects, is
evidently for the worst towards us Christians. The distrust of all
Europeans, which existed before the French hostilities, is now enlarged
to hatred, a feeling from which even the English are hardly excepted. Up
to the last moment, the government and people of Morocco believed that
England would never abandon them to their unscrupulous and ambitious
neighbours.

The citizens and merchants of Mogador could not be brought to believe,
or even to entertain the idea that the British ships of war would
quietly look on, whilst the French--the great rivals and enemies of the
English--destroyed their towns and batteries. Most manifest facts and
stern realities dissipated, in an hour when they little thought of it,
such a fond delusion. From that moment, the moral influence of England,
once our boast, and not perhaps unreasonably so, was no longer felt in
Morocco; and now we have lost almost all hold on the good wishes and
faith of the Mussulman tribes of that immense country.

As to exploring the empire of Morocco, or making it the way of
communication with Soudan or Central Negroland, this is now altogether
impracticable. The difficulties of Europeans travelling the Maroquine
States, always great and perilous, are now become nearly insuperable.
This suspicious distrust, or ill-feeling has communicated itself
contagiously to the tribes of the South as far as the Desert, and has
infected other parts of Barbary. The Engleez, once the cherished friends
of the Moors, are looked upon more or less as the abettors of French
aggressions in North Africa, if not as the sharers with them of the
spoil. In the language of the more plain-spoken Moors, "We always
thought all Christians alike, though we often excepted the English from
the number of our enemies, now we are certain we were wrong; the English
are become as much our enemies as the French and the Spaniards." The
future alone can disclose what will be the particular result of this
unfavourable feeling; both with respect to France and England, and to
other European nations. However, we may look forward without misgiving.
Islamism will wear itself out--the Crescent must wane.

In these preliminary observations, the commercial system of the
Maroquine Court deserves especial mention. The great object of Muley Abd
Errahman [3] is--nay, the pursuit of his whole life has been--to get the
whole of the trade of the empire into his own hands. In fact, he has by
this time virtually succeeded, though the thing is less ostentatiously
done than by the Egyptian viceroy, that equally celebrated
prince-merchant. In order to effect this, his Shereefian Majesty seeks
to involve in debt all the merchants, natives, or foreigners, tempting
them by the offer of profuse credit. As many of them as are needy and
speculative, this imperial boon is without scruple greedily accepted.
The Emperor likewise provides them with commodious houses and stores;
gives them at once ten or twenty thousand dollars worth of credit, and
is content to receive in return monthly instalments. These instalments
never are, never can be regularly paid up. The debt progressively and
indefinitely increases; and whilst they live like so many
merchant-princes, carrying on an immense trade, they are in reality
beggars and slaves of the Emperor. They are, however, styled _imperial_
merchants, and wear their golden chains with ostentatious pride.

This credit costs his Shereetian Highness nothing; he gives no goods,
advances no moneys, whilst he most effectually impoverishes and reduces
to servitude the foreign merchant resident in his empire, never allowing
him to visit his native country without the guarantee of leaving his
wife and family behind as hostages for his return. The native merchant
is, in all cases, absolutely at the mercy of his imperial lord. On the
bombardment of Mogador, all the native and resident traders, not
excepting the English merchants, were found overwhelmed with debt, and,
therefore, were not allowed to leave the country; and they were only
saved from the pillage and massacre of the ferocious Berber tribes by a
miracle of good luck.

Since the bombardment of Mogador, the Emperor has more strongly than
ever set his face against the establishment of strangers in his
dominions. Now his Imperial Highness is anxious that all commerce should
be transacted by his own subjects. The Emperor's Jews are, in future, to
be the principal medium of commerce between Morocco and Europe, which,
indeed, is facilitated by many of the native Jews having direct
relations with European Jews, those of London and Marseilles. In this
way, the Maroquines will be relieved from the embarrassments occasioned
by the presence of Europeans, Jews, or Christians, under the protection
of foreign consuls. The Emperor, also, has a fair share of trade, and
gets a good return on what he exports; the balance of commercial
transactions is always in his favour.

I must add a word on the way of treating politically with the Court of
Morocco. The modes and maxims of this Court, not unlike those of the
Chinese, are procrastination, plausible delays, and voluminous
despatches and communications, which are carried on through the hands of
intermediaries and subordinate agents of every rank and degree. You can
never communicate directly with the Emperor, as with other Barbary
princes and pashas. This system has admirably and invariably succeeded
for the last two or three centuries; that is to say, the empire of
Morocco has remained intact by foreign influences, while its system of
commerce has been an exclusive native monopoly. The Americans, however,
have endeavoured to adopt a more expeditious mode of treating with the
Maroquine Court. They have something, in the style and spirit of Lynch
law, usually made their own demands and their own terms, by threatening
the immediate withdrawal of their consul, or the bombardment of ports.

The Shereefs, thus intimidated, have yielded, though with a very bad
grace. Nevertheless, the Americans have received no favours, nor have
they obtained a nearer approach to the awful Shereefian presence than
other people; and it is not likely they ever will succeed beyond their
neighbours. The French and English have always negotiated and
corresponded, corresponded and negotiated, and been worsted once and
worsted again. Somehow or other, the Emperor has, in most cases, had his
own way. Neither the American nor our own European system is the right
or dignified course. And I am still of opinion, that the Maroquine Court
is so far enlightened respecting the actual state of the barbarians or
Christian infidels, out of its Shereefian land of Marabouts, out of its
central orthodox Mussulman land of the Mugreb, as to be accessible to
ordinary notions of things, and that it would always concede a just
demand if it were rightly and vigorously pressed, and if the religious
fanaticism of its people were not involved in the transaction. Thus far
we may do justice to the government of these Moorish princes.

This opinion, however, does not altogether coincide with that of the
late Mr. Hay. According to the report of Mr. Borrow, as found in his
work, "The Bible of Spain," the Moorish government, according to Mr.
Hay, was "one of the vilest description, with which it was next to
impossible to hold amicable relations, as it invariably acted with bad
faith, and set at nought the most solemn treaties." But, if the
Maroquine Court had acted in this most extraordinary manner, surely
there would now be no Moorish empire of Western Barbary.




CHAPTER II.

Arrival at Tangier.--Moorish Pilgrims in Cordova.--Address of the
Anti-Slavery Society.--Mr. D. Hay, British Consul.--Institut
d'Afrique.--Conveyance of Eunuchs in vessels under the French
Flag.--Franco-Moorish Politics.--Corn Monopolies in Morocco.--Love and
veneration for the English name.--Celebration of the Ayd-Kebir, great
festival. Value of Money in Morocco.--Juvenile Strolling
Singer.--General account of the city of Tangier.--Intercourse between
the Moorish Emperor and the Foreign Consuls.--Cockney sportsmen,--The
degrading of high Moorish Functionaries.--How we smuggle Cattle from
Tangier to Gibraltar.--The Blood-letting of plethoric Placemen.


The communication between Gibraltar and Tangier is by no means easy and
regular, though the places are only a few hours' distance from the
other. I had waited many days at Gib. (as our captain called the former
place), before the wind enabled us to leave, and then, our boat being a
small transport for cattle, and the Government contractors wanting beef
for the garrison--for an Englishman or an English soldier cannot live in
any part of the world without beef--we were compelled to leave with the
wind in our teeth, and to make a night's voyage of this four or five
hours' traverse. It might be worth while, one would think, to try a
small steam-tug for the conveyance of cattle from Tangier to our
garrison, which, besides, would be a great convenience for passengers.

On coming on deck in the morning, Tangier, "the city protected of the
Lord," appeared in all its North African lineaments, white and bright,
shining, square masses of masonry, domes of fair and modest santos, and
the heaven-pointing minarets; here and there a graceful palm, a dark
olive, or the black bushy kharoub, and all denned sharply and clearly in
the goodly prospect. But these Barbary towns had lost much of their
freshness or novelty to me, and novelty is the greatest ingredient of
our pleasure in foreign travel. I had also just travelled through Spain,
and the south of this country is still, as to its aspect, part and
parcel of Morocco, though it is severed by the Straits. In the ancient
Moorish city of Cordova, I had even saluted the turban. I met two Moors
strolling along, with halting steps and triste mien, through the
streets, whom I instinctively addressed.

"_Wein mashe. Ash tomel_. Where are you going? What are you doing?"

The Moors (greatly pleased to hear the sound of their own mother-tongue
in the land of their pilgrimage).--"_Net jerrej_. We are enjoying
ourselves."

Traveller.--"What do you think of the country (Cordova)?"

The Moors.--"This is the land of our fathers."

Traveller.--"Well, what then? Are you going to possess it again?"

The Moors.--"Of what country are you?"

Traveller.--"Engleez."

The Moors (brightening up).--"That is good. Yes, we are very glad. We
thought you might be a Spaniard, or a Frenchman. Now we'll tell you all;
we don't fear. God will give us this country again, when Seedna Aisa [4]
comes to deliver us from these curse-smitten dogs of Spaniards." [5]

Traveller.--"Well, never mind the Spaniards. Have you seen anything you
like here?"

The Moors.--"Look at this knife; it is rusty; it should not be so."

Traveller.--"How!"

The Moors.--"We read in our books and commentators that in Andalous
(Spain) there is no rust, and that nothing rusts here." [6]

Traveller.--"Nonsense; have you seen the hundred pillars of your
mosque?" (Now converted into a cathedral.)

The Moors.--"Ah, we have seen them," with a deep sigh; "and the pillars
will stand till to-morrow." (End of the world.)

I was obliged to say farewell to these poor pilgrims, wandering in the
land of their fathers, and worshipping at the threshold of the noble
remains of Moresco-Spanish antiquity, for the _diligencia_ was starting
off to Seville.

To return from my digression. I soon found myself at home in Tangier
amongst my old friends, the Moors, and coming from Spain, could easily
recognise many things connecting the one country with the other.

The success attending the various measures of the Bey of Tunis for the
abolition of slavery in North Africa, and the favourable manner in which
this prince had received me, when I had charge of a memorial from the
inhabitants of Malta, to congratulate his Highness on his great work on
philanthropy, induced the Committee of the Anti-Slavery Society to
confide to me an address to the Emperor of Morocco, praying him to
enfranchise the negro race of his imperial dominions.

We were fully prepared to encounter the strongest opposition from the
Shereefian Court; but, at the same time, we thought there could be no
insuperable obstacle in our way.

The Maroquines had the same religion and form of government as the
Tuniseens, and by perseverance in this, as well as any other enterprise,
something might at last be effected. Even the agitation of the question
in the empire of Morocco, amongst its various tribes, was a thing not to
be neglected; for the agitation of public opinion in a despotic country
like Morocco, as well as in a constitutional state like England,
admirably prepares the way for great measures of reform and
philanthropy; and, besides the business of an abolitionnist is
agitation; agitation unceasing; agitation in season and out of season.

On my arrival at Tangier, I called upon Mr. Drummond Hay, the British
Consul-General, stating to him my object, and asking his assistance. The
English Government had instructed the Consul to address the Emperor on
this interesting subject, not long before I arrived, but it was with the
greatest difficulty that any sort of answer could be obtained to the
communication.

Mr. Hay, therefore, gave me but small encouragement, and was not a
little surprised when I told him I expected a letter of introduction
from Her Majesty's Government. He could not understand this reiterated
assault on the Shereefs for the abolition of slavery, not comprehending
the absolute necessity of continued agitation on such a difficult
matter, as exciting from a despotic and semi-barbarous prince, fortified
by the prejudices of ages and generally sanctioned in his conduct by his
religion, the emancipation of a degraded and enslaved portion of the
human race. [7] However, Mr. Hay was polite, and set about arranging
matters for proceeding with a confessedly disagreeable subject for any
consul to handle under like circumstances. He made a copy of the address
of the Anti-Slavery Society, and sent it to the English Government,
requesting instructions. I expected an address from the Institut
d'Afrique of Paris; but, after waiting some time, the Secretary, Mr.
Hippolyte de St. Anthoine, wrote me a letter, in which he stated that,
on account of the ill-will manifested by the Emperor to the
establishment of the French in Algeria, the Institut had come to the
painful conclusion of not addressing him for the abolition of the
slave-trade in his imperial states.

Soon after my arrival at Tangier, the English letter-boat, Carreo
Ingles, master, Matteo Attalya, brought twelve eunuch slaves, African
youths, from Gibraltar. They are a present from the Viceroy of Egypt to
the Emperor of Morocco. The Correo is the weekly bearer of letters and
despatches to and from Morocco. The slaves were not entered upon the
bill of health, thus infringing upon the maritime laws of Gibraltar and
Tangier. The other captains of the little boats could not help
remarking, "You English make so much fuss about putting down the
slave-trade, and allow it to be carried on under your own flag." Even
the foreign consuls here reprobated the inconsistency of the British
Government, in aiding the slave-trade of the Mediterranean by their own
flag. However, Government ordered a strict inquiry into this case, and
took means for preventing the occurrence of a like abuse. Nevertheless,
since then the Emperor has actually applied to the British Consul to
allow eunuchs to be brought down the Mediterranean in English steamers,
in the same way as these were brought from Malta to Gibraltar in the
Prometheus--as, forsooth, servants and passengers. And on the refusal of
our consul to sanction this illicit conveyance of slaves by British
vessels, the Emperor applied to the French consul, who condescended to
hoist the tri-coloured flag for the transport of slave-eunuchs! This is
one way of mitigating the prejudices of the Shereefian Court against the
French occupation of Algeria. Many slaves are carried up and down the
Mediterranean in French vessels.

The keeper of an hotel related to me with great bitterness, that the
French officer who came with me from Gibraltar had left Tetuan for
Algeria. The officer had ordered a great many things of this man,
promising to pay on his return to Tangier. He deposited an old hatbox as
a security, which, on being opened by the hotel keeper, was found to be
full of greasy paper. At Tetuan, the officer gave himself out as a
special envoy of the Emperor of the French.

My good friends, the Moors, continue to speculate upon the progress of
the French army in Algeria. I asked a Moorish officer what he thought of
the rumoured French invasion of Morocco. He put the backs of his hands
together, and locking together his fingers to represent the back of a
hedgehog, he observed emphatically; "Impossible! No Christians can
invade us. Our country is like a hedgehog, no one can touch us." Tangier
Christians will never permit the French to invade Morocco, whatever may
be the pretext. This is even the opinion of the foreign consuls.

As a specimen of the commercial system of this country, I may mention
that the monopoly of exporting leeches was sold this week to a Jew, at
the rate of 25,000 dollars. Now the Jew refuses to buy leeches except at
his own price, whilst every unfortunate trader is obliged to sell to him
and to him only. In fact, the monopolist fixes the price, and everybody
who brings leeches to Tangier must accept it. This case of leeches may
be applied to nearly all the monopolies of the country. Can anything be
more ruinous to commerce?

All the Moors of Tangier, immediately on entering into conversation with
me, inquire if I am Engleez? Even Moorish children ask this question: it
appears to be a charm to them. The Ayd Kebir (great feast) was
celebrated to-day, being the first of the new year. It was ushered in
yesterday by prayer in the mosques. About 9 A.M. the governor, the
commandant of the troops, and other Tangier authorities, proceeded to
the open space of the market, attended with flags and music, and some
hundred individuals all dressed in their holiday clothes. The white
flag, typical of the sanctity of religion, floated over others of
scarlet and green; the music was of squeaking bagpipes, and rude
tumtums, struck like minute drums. The greater part were on horseback,
the governor being most conspicuous. This troop of individuals ascended
a small hill of the market-place, where they remained half an hour in
solemn prayer.

No Jew or Christian was allowed to approach the magic or sacred circle
which enclosed them. This being concluded, down ran a butcher with a
sheep on his back; just slaughtered, and bleeding profusely. A troop of
boys followed quickly at his heels pelting him with stones. The butcher
ran through the town to the seashore, and thence to the house of the
Kady--the boys still in hot and breathless pursuit, hard after him,
pelting him and the bleeding sheep. The Moors believe, if the man can
arrive at the house of the judge before the sheep dies, that the people
of Tangier will have good luck; but, if the sheep should be quite dead,
and not moving a muscle, then it will bring them bad luck, and the
Christians are likely to come and take away their country from them. The
drollest part of the ceremony is, that the boys should scamper after the
butcher, pelting the sheep, and trying to kill it outright, thus
endeavouring to bring ill-luck upon their city and themselves. But how
many of us really and knowingly seek our misfortunes? On the occasion of
this annual feast, every Moor, or head of a family, kills a sheep. The
rich give to the poor, but the poor usually save up their earnings to be
able to purchase a sheep to kill on this day. The streets are in
different parts covered with blood, making them look like so many
slaughter grounds. When the bashaw of the province is in Tangier,
thousands of the neighbouring Arabs come to pay him their respects. With
the Moors, the festivals of religion are bona fide festivals. It may
also be added, as characteristic of these North African barbarians,
that, whilst many a poor person in our merry Christian England does not,
and cannot, get his plum-pudding and roast-beef at Christmas, there is
not a poor man or even a slave, in Morocco who does not eat his lamb on
this great feast of the Mussulmans. It would be a mortal sin for a rich
man to refuse a poor man a mouthful of his lamb.

Of course there was a sensation among the native population, and even
among the consular corps, about my mission; but I have nothing very
particular to record. I had many Moorish visitors, some of whom were
officers of the imperial troops. I made the acquaintance of one, Sidi
Ali, with whom I had the following dialogue:--

Traveller.--"Sidi Ali, what can I do to impress Muley Abd Errahman in my
favour?"

Sidi Ali.--"Money!"

Traveller.--"But will the Emir of the Shereefs accept of money from us
Christians?"

Sidi Ali.--"Money!"

Traveller.--"What am I to give the minister Ben Dris, to get his
favour?"

Sidi Ali.--"Money!"

Traveller.--"Can I travel in safety in Morocco?"

Sidi Ali.--"Money:"

Indeed "money" seems to be the all and everything in Morocco, as among
us, "the nation of shopkeepers." The Emperor himself sets the example,
for he is wholly occupied in amassing treasures in Mequiney. Another
acquaintance of mine was a little more communicative.

Aged Moor.--"What can I do for you, stranger? You are good to me, every
time I call here you give me tea with plenty of sugar in it. What can I
do for you in my country?"

Traveller.--"Tell me how to get on in my mission? How can I see Muley
Errahman?"

Aged Moor.--"Now I am bound to give you my best advice. First then, take
plenty of money with you. All love money; therefore without money you
can do nothing. Muley Abd Errahman loves money, and money he must have.
And the minister loves money, and the minister must not be forgotten.
The minister is the door to the Emperor. You cannot get into the house
but through the door. Out of the towns and cities, the Emperor has no
power; so that whenever you travel out of these places, remember to give
the people money."

I had numberless volunteers to conduct me to Fez. All came begging for
this honour and lucrative employment. Whatever may be said of the
virtues of hospitality, I found all the world alike in its determination
to make the most of strangers, if not to devour them. But the Emperor
was not at Fez; he was in the southern capital, and it was necessary for
me to go via Mogador, to endeavour to obtain an interview with him at
that place.

The dreary monotony of Moorish life was one day broken in upon by a
juvenile strolling singer, who attracted a crowd of silent and attentive
listeners. It was a grateful sight to see old men, with long and silvery
beards, reclining in mute and serious attention; young men lounging in
the pride and consciousness of animal strength; little children
intermixed, but without prattle or merriment--all fixed and fascinated
with the charm of vocal song. The vocalist himself was a picturesque
object; his face was burnt black with Afric's sun, his bare head was
wildly covered with long, black matted, and curly hair, but his eye was
soft and serene; and, as he stretched his throat upwards to give compass
to his voice, he seemed as if he would catch inspiration from the
Prophet in heaven. A coarse brown blanket enveloped his spare and
way-worn body, his only clothing and shelter from the heat by day and
the cold by night, a fold of which fell upon his naked feet.

The voice of the Arab vocalist was extremely plaintive, even to the
tones and inflections of distress, and the burden of his song was of
religion and of love--two sentiments which all pure minds delight to
combine. When he stopped a moment to take breath, a murmur of applause
vibrated through the still air of the evening, not indeed for the youth,
but for God! [8] for it was a prayer of the artless and enraptured
bystanders, invoking Allah to bless the singing lad, and also to bless
them, while ascribing all praise to the Deity.

This devout scene raised the Moors greatly in my estimation. I thought
men could not be barbarians, or even a jealous or vindictive race, who
were charmed with such simple melody of sounds, and with sentiments so
pure and true to nature.

The Arab youth sang:--

  Oh, there's none but the One God!
  I'll journey over the Desert far
  To seek my love the fairest of maidens;
  The camels moan loudly to carry me thither,
  Gainly are they, and fleeter than the swift-legged ostrich.
  Oh, there's none but the One God!

  What though the Desert wind slay me;
  What of it? death is from God.
  And woe to me! I cannot repine.
  But I'll away to the abode of my love,
  I'll embrace her with all my strength,
  I'll bear her back thence, and rest her on my couch.
  Oh, there's none but the One God!

So sang in plaintive accents the youth, until the last ray of the sun
lingered on the minarets' tops, when, by the louder and authoritative
voice of the Muezin calling the Faithful to prayers, this crowd of the
worshippers of song and vocal harmony was dispersed to meet again, and
forthwith chant a more solemn strain. The poor lad of the streets and
highways went into the mosque along with his motley group of admirers;
and all blended their voices and devotion together in prayer and
adoration, lowly and in profound prostration, before the Great Allah!

It is my intention, in the course of the present narrative, to give a
brief account of the principal towns and cities of North Africa; and I
cannot do better than begin with Tangier. This city is very ancient,
having probably been built by the aboriginals, Berbers, and was usually
called by the Romans, Taigo on Tingis. The Emperor Claudius re-peopled
it, and called it Julia Traducta. The Moors call it Sanjah, and relate
that Benhad Sahab El-Alem built it, also surrounded it with walls of
metal, and constructed its houses of gold and silver. In this condition,
it remained until destroyed by some Berber kings, who carried away all
its treasures. The modern Tangier is a small city of the province of
Hasbat, picturesquely placed on the eastern slope of a hill, which
terminates in the west with its port and bay, having some analogy to the
site of Algiers. It has almost a square form, and its ramparts are a
wall, flanked here and there with towers. This place, likewise, is most
advantageously situate in the narrowest part of the Straits of
Gibraltar, at a few miles east of Cape Spartel, and thirty miles W.S.W.
of Gibraltar, and has, therefore, been coveted by all the conquerors of
North Africa. The Phoenicians, Romans, Goths, and Arabs successively
effected its conquest; and it was long a bone of eager contention
between the Moors and Portuguese. In 1471, Alonzo, King of Portugal,
took it from the Moors; and in 1662 it came into the hands of the
English, as a part of the dowry of Catherine, queen of Charles II.; so,
whilst in our possession it was a place of considerable strength; but on
its evacuation in 1684 by order of the English government, who were
disgusted by the expense of its occupation, and the bootless collisions
with the natives, the fortifications were demolished, and only the
vestiges of them now are visible. Had the British Government continued
its occupation for half a century, and kept in check the Maroquine
tribes, it is probable that by this time the greater part of Morocco
would have been under British rule, when we might have founded a
flourishing colony, from which all North Africa might have received the
elements of Christian civilization.

Old Tangier (Tangier belia) is situate about four miles east from the
present, being now a heap of ruins, near a little river called Khalk or
Tingia, spanned over by the remains of a once finely-built Roman bridge.
Here was likewise an artificial port, where the Roman galleys retired.
The whole of this part of Africa was denominated by the Romans,
Mauritania, from the name of this city; and during their administration
was united to the government of Spain. Tangier had a population of from
four to six thousand. Grabert estimates the population at 10,000,
including 2,500 Jews, who live intermixed with the Moors; 1,400 negroes,
300 Berbers of Rif, and about 100 Christians. The Consuls-General of the
European Powers reside here; and most of them have commodious houses.
The Swedish Consul has a splendid garden, which is thrown open to the
European residents. There is but one good street in the town; and the
transition from Europe to Barbary, at so short a distance, is striking
to the stranger. Tarifa, on the opposite side, along the coast of Spain,
has, however, a Moorish affinity to this place; and the dress of the
women is not very dissimilar in the two towns, once inhabited by the
people of the same religion, and now, perhaps, many of them descendants
of the same families.

Tangier, though a miserable place compared to most of the cities in
Europe, is something considerable in Morocco, and the great mosque is
rather splendid. Mr. Borrow justly remarks that its minarets look like
the offspring of the celebrated Giralda of Seville. The Christians have
here a convent, and a church within it, to which are attached
half-a-dozen monks. There is no Protestant church; Mr. Hay reads service
in the British Consulate, and invites the Protestant residents. Tangier
is the only place in the empire where the Christian religion is publicly
professed. The Jews have three or four small synagogues. Usually, the
synagogues in Barbary are nothing more than private houses.

Before the bombardment of the French, the fortifications mounted forty
pieces or so of cannon, but of no strength; on the contrary, going
completely to ruin and decay, being scarcely strong enough to fire a
salute from. The Bay of Tangier is good and spacious; but, in the course
of time, will be filled up with sand. The shipping is exposed to strong
westerly winds. The safest anchorage, however, is on the the eastern
part, about half a mile off the shore, in a line with the round tower.
With a few thousand pounds, one of the finest--at least, one of the most
convenient--ports of the Mediterranean could be constructed here. There
is a bashaw of this province, who resides at El-Araish, and a
lieutenant-governor, who lives at Tangier. With these functionaries, the
representatives of European Powers have principally to transact affairs.
On the north is the castle, the residence of the governor.

Eleven consuls take up their abode in Tangier; the British, French,
Spanish, Portuguese, American, Danish, Swedish, Sardinian, Neapolitan,
Austrian, and Dutch. Each consular house generally belongs to its
particular nation, the ground to the Sultan.

The consuls who have the most interest to guard in Morocco, are the
British, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. Up to the bombardment of
Tangier, the Danish and Swedish Governments paid to the Maroquine Court,
the former 25,000 and the latter 20,000 dollars per annum, to have the
privilege of hoisting their flag at this port. The French hostilities
against Morocco furnished a convenient opportunity for getting this
odious tribute abolished. The Americans led the way in getting rid of
this subservience to the Shereefian Court, and refused from the first
all presents and annual donations. Generally, however, when new consuls
are appointed, they bring with them presents, and visit the Emperor in
person. On the occasion of _fetes_, they sometimes make presents to the
governors of districts. Whenever the Emperor condescends to come down to
Tangier, three days after his arrival, it is the required etiquette for
the consuls to seek his presence, and to make their obeisance to the
Shereefian Lord. The consuls are accustomed to decide upon and control
the affairs of their own countrymen, and those placed under their
protection; but when a Moor and an European are concerned in a
transaction, it is usually a mixed commission of the consulate and the
Moorish authorities.

Many curious anecdotes are current respecting the consuls and the
Moorish government. A Spanish consul once took it into his head to
strike his flag and leave Tangier. Whilst he was gone, the Emperor
ordered all the Jews to go and take possession of his house and live in
it, as a degradation. The consular house was soon crammed with dirty
Jews, whose vermin and filth rendered the house untenantable, until it
had undergone a thorough repair and cleansing. Sometimes the Emperor
shows a great affection for a particular consular family. The family of
the Portuguese Consul were great favorites. During the war of succession
in Portugal, the Portuguese Consul contracted debts in Tangier, not
being able to get his salary amidst the strife of parties. The Moors
complained to the Emperor of the consul's debts. Muley Abd Errahman,
though a thorough miser himself, paid the consul's debts, alleging as a
reason, "the consul was a friend of my ancestors, and he shall be my
friend." The Portuguese government wished to remove this consul on
account of his alleged Miguelite propensities, but the Emperor
threatened, if they did, that he would not receive another. Our
government compelled the Portuguese to gratify the personal feeling of
the Emperor. Senhor Colaso is a native of Morocco, as his father was
before him, and the Emperor calls them his own children. The Jewish
servants of the consulates are free from the poll-tax and other
obnoxious contributions, and their Moorish servants are also exempt from
government conscriptions.

At times, very serious misunderstandings and disputes occur between the
consuls and the Emperor on the subject of his Imperial Highness. Our
consul, Mr. Hay, was shot at by a fanatic marabout, the ball missing
him, but killing a horse of one of the party. This affair was passed
over, the consul very properly taking no notice of a mad saint. But I
will cite another instance, as showing the intimate perception which the
Moors have of the peculiar precepts of our religion, as well as
exhibiting their own moral ideas, in each case representing them to us
in a favourable light. One of the Emperor's subjects had insulted the
French consul, M. Sourdeau, and Muley Suleiman addressed to him the
following singular epistle.

"In the name of God, the most merciful. There is no power or force
except with the Most High and Great God!

"Consul of the French nation, Sourdeau, and salutation to him who is in
the right way. Inasmuch as you are our guest, under our protection, and
consul in our country of a great nation, so we cannot but wish you the
greatest consideration and the honours. On which account, you will
perceive that that which has happened to you is to us intolerable, and
would still be so had it been done by one of our own children or most
intimate friends. And although we cannot put any obstacle to the decrees
of God, yet such an act is not grateful to us, even if it is done to the
vilest of men, or even cattle, and certainly we will not fail to show an
example of severe justice, God willing. If you were not Christians,
having a feeling heart, and bearing patiently injuries, after the
example of your prophet, whom God has in glory, Jesus the son of Mary,
who, in the Book which he brought you in the name of God, commands you,
that if any person strike you on one cheek turn to him the other also;
and who (always blessed of God!) also did not defend himself when the
Jews sought to kill him, from whom God took him. And, in our Book, it is
said, by the mouth of our Prophet, there is no people among whom there
are so many disposed to good works as those who call themselves
Christians; and certainly among you there are many priests and holy men
who are not proud; nevertheless, our Prophet also says, that we cannot
impute a crime to persons of three sorts, that is to say, madmen (until
they return to sound sense), children, and persons who sleep. Now this
man who has offended you is mad, and has no knowledge; but we have
decreed to give you full satisfaction. If, however, you should be
pleased to pardon him, you will perform a magnanimous work, and the Most
Merciful will abundantly recompense you. On the other hand, if you
absolutely wish him to be punished, he is in your hands, for in my
empire no one shall fear injustice or violence, with the assistance of
God."

A whimsical story is current in Tangier respecting the dealings of the
Shereefian Court with the Neapolitan government, which characteristically
sets forth Moorish diplomacy or manoeuvring. A ship load of sulphur was
sent to the Emperor. The Moorish authorities declared it was very coarse
and mixed with dirt. With great alacrity, the Neapolitan government sent
another load of finer and better quality. This was delivered; and the
Consul asked the Moorish functionaries to allow the coarse sulphur to be
conveyed back. These worthies replied, "Oh dear, no! it is of no
consequence, the Emperor says, he will keep the bad, and not offend his
royal cousin, the King of Naples, by sending it back." The Neapolitan
government had no alternative but to submit, and thank the chief of the
Shereefs for his extreme condescension in accepting two ship-loads of
sulphur instead of one.

There are occasional communications between Tangier and Tarifa, in
Spain, but they are very frequent with Gibraltar. A vast quantity of
European merchandize is imported here from Gibraltar for Fez and the
north of Morocco. All the postal and despatch business also comes
through Tangier, which has privileges that few or no other Maroquine
cities possess. The emperors, indeed, have been wont to call it "the
City of Christians." In the environs, there is at times a good deal of
game, and the European residents go out to shoot, as one is wont in
other countries to talk a walk. The principal game is the partridge and
hare, and the grand sport, the wild boar. Our officers of the Gibraltar
garrison come over for shooting. But quackery and humbug exist in
everything. A young gentleman has just arrived from Gibraltar, who had
been previously six weeks on his passage from Holland to that place,
with his legs infixed in a pair of three-league boots. He says he has
come from Holland on purpose to sport and hunt in Morocco. Several of
the consuls, when they go out sporting, metamorphose themselves into
veteran Numidian sportsmen. You would imagine they were going to hunt
lions for months in the ravines of the Atlas, whereas it is only to
shoot a stray partridge or a limping hare, or perchance they may meet
with a boar. And this they do for a couple of days, or twenty-four
hours, sleeping during the night very snugly under tents, and fed and
feasted with milk, fowls, and sheep by the Arabs.

Morocco, like all despotic countries, furnishes some severe examples of
the degrading of high functionaries. There is an old man,
Sidi-El-Arby-Es-Said, living there, who is a marked victim of imperial
tyranny. Some years ago, the conqueror despoiled him of all his wealth,
and threw him into prison, after he had been twenty years bashaw of this
district. He was in prison one year with his two sons. The object of the
Emperor was to extort the last filse of his money; and he entirely
succeeded. The oppressor, however, relented a little on the death of one
of his victim's sons; released him from confinement, and gave the
ex-bashaw two houses, one for himself and the other for his surviving
son. The old captain of the port has been no less than a dozen times in
prison, under the exhausting pressure of the Emperor. After the imperial
miser has copiously bled his captain, he lets him out to fill his skin
again. The old gentleman is always merry and loyal, in spite of the
treatment from his imperial taskmaster.

Very funny stories are told by the masters of the small craft, who
transport the bullocks from hence to Gibraltar. The government of that
place are only allowed to export, at a low duty per annum, a certain
number of bullocks. The contractor's agents come over; and at the moment
of embarking the cattle, something like the following dialogue
frequently ensues.

_Agent of Contractor_.--"Count away!"

_Captain of the Port_.--"One, two, three, &c. Thirty, forty. Ah! stop!
stop! too many."

_Agent of Contractor_.--"No, you fool, there are only thirty."

_Captain of the Port_.--"You lie! there are forty."

_Agent of Contractor_.--"Only thirty, I tell you," (putting three or
four dollars into his hand).

_Captain of the Port_.--"Well, well, there are only thirty."

And, in this way, the garrison of Gibraltar often gets 500 or 1,000 head
of cattle more than the stipulated number, at five dollars per head duty
instead of ten. Who derives the benefit of peculation I am unable to
state. An anecdote recurs to me of old Youssef, Bashaw of Tripoli,
illustrative of the phlebotomizing system now under consideration.
Colonel Warrington one day seriously represented to the bashaw how his
functionaries robbed him, and took the liberty of mentioning the name of
one person. "Yes, yes," observed the bashaw, "I know all about him; I
don't want to catch him yet; he's not fat enough. When he has gorged a
little more, I'll have his head off."

The Emperor of Morocco, however, usually treats his bashaws of the coast
with greater consideration than those of the interior cities, the former
being more in contact with Europeans, his Highness not wishing his
reputation to suffer in the eyes of Christians.




CHAPTER III.

The Posada.--Ingles and Benoliel.--Amulets for successful
parturition.--Visits of a Moorish Taleb and a Berber.--Three Sundays
during a week in Barbary.--M. Rey's account of the Empire of
Morocco.--The Government Auctioneer gives an account of Slavery and the
Slave Trade in Morocco.--Benoliel as English Cicerone.--Departure from
Tangier to Gibraltar.--How I lost my fine green broadcloth.--Mr.
Frenerry's opinion of Maroquine Affairs.


I took up my stay at the "English Hotel" (posada Ingles), kept by
Benoliel, a Morocco Jew, who spoke tolerable English. A Jerusalemitish
rabbi came in one day to write charms for his wife, she being near her
confinement. The superstition of charms and other cognate matters, are
shared alike by all the native inhabitants of Barbary. It often happens
that a Marabout shrine will be visited by Moor and Jew, each investing
the departed saint with his own peculiar sanctity. So contagious is this
species of superstition, that Romish Christians, long resident in
Barbary, assisted by the inventive monks, at last discover the Moorish
or Jewish to be a Christian saint. The Jewesses brought our Oriental
rabbi, declaring him to know everything, and that his garments smelt of
the Holy City. Benoliel, or Ben, as the English called him, protested to
me that he did not believe in charms; he only allowed the rabbi to write
them to please the women. But I have found, during my travels in the
Mediterranean, many persons of education, who pretended they did not
believe this or that superstition of their church, whilst they were at
heart great cowards, having no courage to reject a popular falsehood,
and quite as superstitious as those who never doubt the excrescent
dogmas or traditionary fables of their religion. The paper amulets,
however, operated favourably on Mrs. Benoliel. She was delivered of a
fine child; and received the congratulations of her neighbours. The
child was named Sultana; [9] and the people were all as merry as if a
princess had been born in Israel.

I received a visit from a Moorish taleb, to whom I read some portions of
my journal, as also the Arabic Testament:

_Taleb_.--"The English read Arabic because they are the friends of
Mussulmans. For this reason, God gives them wit to understand the
language of the Koran."

_Traveller_.--"We wish to study all languages, and to know all people."

_Taleb_.--"Now, as you have become so wise in our country, and read
Arabic, where next are you going? Why not be quiet and return home, and
live a marabout? Where next are you going?"

In this strain the Taleb continued lecturing me, until he was
interrupted by a Berber of Rif.

The Rifian.--"Christian, Engleez, come to our mountains. I will conduct
you to the Emir, on whom is the blessing of God. Come to the Emir,
come."

Traveller.--"No, I've nothing to do with war."

The Rifian.--"Ah! ah! ah! I know you are a necromancer. Cannot you tell
me where money is buried? I want money very bad. Give me a peseta."

Traveller.--"Not I. I am going to see your Emperor."

The Rifian.--"Ah! ah! ah! that is right; give him plenty of money. Muley
Abd Errahman hoards up money always. If you give him plenty of money,
you will be placed on a horse and ride by his side."

The inhabitants of Barbary all bury their money. The secret is confided
to a single person, who often is taken ill, and dies before he can
discover the hiding place to his surviving relatives. Millions of
dollars are lost in this way. The people, conscious of their secret
practice, are always on the scent for concealed treasures.

One Friday, some Jews asked the governor of the custom-house to grant
them their clearance-papers, because they were, early on the Sunday
following, to depart for Gibraltar. The governor said, "Come to-morrow."
"No," replied the Jews, "we cannot, it's our feast." "Well," returned
the governor, "you Jews have your feasts, the Christians have theirs,
and we Mussulmen will have ours. I'll not go down to the custom-house to
day, for it is my feast." These three Sundays or feasts, prevalent
through North Africa, are very inconvenient for business, and often make
men rebels to their religious persuasions.

The following is a Frenchman's account of Morocco [10] up to the time of
its bombardments.

"The question of Algeria cannot be confined within the limits of the
French possessions. It embraces Morocco, a country possessing a vast and
varied population. Leo gave a marvellous description of Fez, as the
second city of Islamism in his time. Travellers who have sought to
explore Africa, rarely or never took the route via Morocco. Formerly,
monks were stationed in the interior to purchase captives; but, since
piracy has ceased, these have left the country. Very few persons go into
the interior, for Maroquine merchants come out of their country to
trade. Tangier and Tetuan are not fair specimens of Morocco; they form a
transition from Europe to Africa, being neither Spain nor Morocco. The
ambassador, or merchant, who now-a-days gets an audience with the
Sultan, is allowed to see little of the country, arising from the
jealousy of the government or native merchants. Davidson was probably
murdered by the jealousy of the Fez merchants.

"All the larger cities of Morocco are situate upon the coast, excepting
three capitals of the interior--Fez, Miknas, and Morocco, to which
El-Kesar-Kebir may be added. The other interior places are mostly large
villages, where the tribes of the country collect together. The
inhabitants of the cities make gain their only business, and debauchery
their only pleasure. As to their learning, there is an immense
difference between a Turkish ulema and a Moorish doctor.

"From the fall of Carthage and Rome, until the fourteenth century, the
people of North Africa have had relations with Europe. The independence
of the kingdoms of Fez and Morocco fell by internal dissensions like the
Mussulman power in Spain. After expelling the Mahometans from Spain, the
Christians (Spaniards and Portuguese) pursued them to Morocco, and built
a line of forts on its coasts. Those have all now been abandoned except
four, held by Spain. England destroyed the fortifications and abandoned
Tangier, which she had obtained through Portugal. To blockade Tangier at
the present time, would do more harm to England than Morocco, by cutting
off the supply of provisions for Gibraltar.

"The navy of Morocco was never very great. It was the audacity and
cruelty of its pirates which frightened Christendom. During the maritime
wars of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Emperor of Morocco
remained neutral, which was a great benefit to the Christian belligerent
powers. Spain must be at peace with Morocco; she must either be an
active friend, or an enemy. The policy of Morocco, in former times, was
so well managed, that it made all the Christian powers pay a certain
tribute to that country, to insure themselves against the piracy of its
cruisers.

"The history of the diplomatic relations of Europe with Morocco,
presents only a chronicle of shameful concessions made by the European
powers to the Moorish princes. At the end of the eighteenth century, the
Sultan of Morocco declared that, 'Whoever was not his friend was his
enemy,' or, in other words, that 'he would arm his cruisers against
every flag which did not float upon a consular house at Tangier.'

"Muley Abd Errahman sent his corsairs to sea in 1828 to frighten the
European powers into treaties. The plan succeeded, the first squabble
being with Austria. From 1830, or, better to mark the period, since the
capture of Algiers, the corsairs and their depredations have ceased. The
progress of France in Africa has produced a profound impression in
Morocco, but European powers have not taken their due advantage of this.
Many humiliating acts have been performed by different governments.
England possessed herself of all the commerce of importance since she
has been established at Gibraltar. On the whole coast of Morocco, there
are only two mercantile establishments under the French flag. French
consular agents have no influence with the Moorish government. Morocco
and Spain have shewn themselves neighbours. Mutual assistance has often
been given by Morocco and Spain, in cases of national distress,
particularly in seasons of famine.

"The Sultan of Morocco surveys from a distance the events of Europe, and
endeavours to arrest their effect on his frontier. The residence of the
foreign consuls was first at Rabat, then at Tangier. The object has
constantly been to keep the consuls, as far as possible, from his
capital and the transactions of his interior, in order that they may not
see the continual revolts of his tribes, and so discover the weakness
and disunion of the empire. Communications between Tangier and Morocco
require at least forty days, a system shrewdly laid down by the Sultan,
who is anxious to be as remote as possible from the consuls and their
influence.

"The state of the army and navy, and particularly of the munitions of
war, is very bad. All the coast of Morocco is difficult of access, and
the only two ports which would have served for a naval station, are
those which have been abandoned, viz., the Bay of Santa Cruz and the
ancient Mamora, between El-Araish and Rabat; the rest are only
roadsteads."

M. Rey thus sums up his observations upon European diplomacy directed
towards Morocco. "Voluntary humbling of European nations, always ready
to pander to Moorish rapacity, even without reaping any advantage for
it; and who submit themselves to be uselessly ransomed. As to the
English, they show suppleness and prudence, and sacrificing national
dignity to the prosperity of commerce; the Sultans are not backward in
taking advantage adroitly of a situation so favourable and almost
unique; such is the picture of the diplomatic relations we have
sketched."

He describes the personal character and habits of the Sultan, Muley Abd
Errahman, and gives details of the court.

"A Jew is the master-cook of the Emperor, his Imperial Highness always
eats alone. The Sultan receives European merchants in a very friendly
manner, whilst he keeps ambassadors at a respectful distance. An
interview with an ambassador does not last more than ten minutes. The
Sultan replies in a phraseology which has not been varied for three
centuries. The title of the present vizier is not minister, but sahab,
"friend" or "companion." The Sultan has the soundest judgment of any man
in his empire, and great tact in the administration of affairs. He
instructs himself by continual questions.

"His passion is avarice, and he has converted the whole empire into a
commercial firm for the accumulation of his gains. Muley Tsmael left a
treasury of 100 millions of ducats, [11] and at the death of Sidi
Mohammed, this treasury was reduced to two millions. The constant
occupation of Muley Abd Errahmnan is to replenish the imperial treasury.
Commerce, which was neglected by his predecessors, has all his
attention. The cruelty of the former sultans is exchanged for the
avarice of the present. The history of these Shereefian princes is a
chain of unheard-of atrocities. The present sultan keeps not a single
promise when his interests interfere."

M. Rey gives us this flattering tableau as a social picture of Morocco.

Covetous governors are continually succeeding one another, they are ever
eager of enjoying the advantages of their position; their thirst for
plunder is so much the more intense, as they are not allowed time to
satisfy it, so they prey on the people. The inhabitants of towns and of
the country live in rags in miserable hovels. What raiment! what food!
mortality is dreadful, the children are invalids, and the women,
especially in the country, are condemned to do the work of beasts of
burden; such is the picture of society.

I have quoted these few passages from the "Memoire" of M. Rey, because
he was resident many years in Tangier, and his account of the country
discovers talent and intelligence, but is, of course, coloured with a
strong anti-English feeling. Mr. Hay wrote on the back of his
Memoire,--"All that is said in reference to Great Britain is false and
malicious." M. Rey's opinions of the Moors and the present governors are
still more bitter and unjust.

I had an interview with El-Martel-Warabah, government auctioneer of
slaves, from whom I obtained details respecting the slave-trade in
Tangier and Morocco generally. There is no market for slaves in Tangier.
The poor creatures are led about the town as cattle, particularly in the
main street, before the doors of the principal merchants, where they are
usually disposed of. No Jew or Christian is permitted to buy or hold a
slave in this country. Government possess many slaves, and people hire
them out by the day from the authorities. The ordinary price of a good
slave is eighty dollars. Boys, at the age of nine or ten years, sell the
best; female slaves do hot fetch so much as male slaves, unless of
extraordinary beauty. Slaves are imported from all the south.

The Sultan levies no duty on the sale or import of slaves. When one runs
away from his master, and takes refuge with another, the new master
usually writes to the former, offering to buy him; thus slaves are often
enticed away. They are sometimes allowed to abscond without their owners
troubling themselves about them, their master's being unable either to
feed or sell them.

In cases of punishment for all serious offences, slaves are brought
before the judicial authorities, and suffer the same punishment as free
men. In cases not deemed grave, they are flogged, or otherwise privately
punished by their masters. Slaves went to war with Abd-el-Kader, against
the French. The Arabs of Algeria had formerly many slaves. The chief
depot of slaves is Morocco, the southern capital. Ten thousand have been
imported during one year; but the average number brought into Morocco
is, perhaps, not more than half that amount. The Maroquine Moors, before
departing for any country under the British flag, usually give liberty
to their slaves. On their return, however, they sell them again as
slaves, or get rid of them some way or other. A slave once having tasted
of liberty, can never again be fully reconciled to thraldom. Moors
resident in Gibraltar, have frequently slaves with them. A few days ago,
a slave-boy, resident in Gibraltar, wished to turn Christian, and was
immediately sent back to Tangier, and sold to another master.

Europeans, with whom I have conversed in Tangier, assure me that slaves
are generally well treated, and that cases of cruelty are rare.
Nevertheless, they eagerly seek their freedom when an opportunity
offers. In 1833, a man of great power and influence in the Gharb
(province of Morocco), named El-Haj Mohammed Ben El-Arab, on a
remonstrance of his slaves, who stated that the English had abolished
slavery, and that they ought to have their liberty, called all his
slaves together, to the number of seventy-two, and actually took the
bold and generous resolution of liberating them. But, before releasing
them from bondage, he lectured them upon the difficulty of finding
subsistence in their new state of freedom, and then wrote out their
_Atkas_ of liberty. As might have been expected, some returned
voluntarily to servitude, not being able to get a living, whilst the
greater part obtained an honourable livelihood, enjoying the fruits of
independent freedom. It is mentioned, as an instance of fidelity, that a
negress is the gaoler of the women in Tangier. [12]

At every Moorish feast of consequence (four of which are celebrated here
in a year), the slaves of Tangier perambulate the streets with music and
dancing, dressed in their holiday clothes, to beg alms from all classes
of the population, particularly Europeans. The money collected is
deposited in the hands of their chief; to this is added the savings of
the whole year. In the spring, all is spent in a feast, which lasts
seven days. The slaves carry green ears of wheat, barley, and fresh
dates about the town. The Moorish women kiss the new corn or fruit, and
give the slaves a trifle of money. A slave, when he is dissatisfied with
his master, sometimes will ask him to be allowed to go about begging
until he gets money enough to buy his freedom. The slave puts the atka
in his mouth (which piece of written paper when signed, assures his
freedom), and goes about the town, crying, "Fedeeak Allah, (Ransom of
God!)" All depends on his luck. He may be months, or even years, before
he accumulates enough to purchase his ransom.

Tangier Moors pretend that the negroes of Timbuctoo sacrifice annually a
white man, the victim being preserved and fed for the occasion. When the
time of immolation arrives, the white man is adorned with fair flowers,
and clothes of silk and many colours, and led out and sacrificed at a
grand "fiesta." Slaves and blacks in Morocco keep the same feast, with
the difference, that not being able to get a man to sacrifice, they kill
a bullock. Such a barbarous rite may possibly be practised in some part
of Negroland, but certainly not at Timbuctoo. All these tales about
Negro cannibals I am inclined to believe inventions. There never yet has
been published a well authenticated case of negro cannibalism.

The grand cicerone for the English at Tangier, is Benoliel. He is a man
of about sixty years of age, and initiated into the sublimest mysteries
of the consular politics of the Shereefs. Ben is full of anecdotes of
everybody and everything from the emperor on the Shreefian throne, down
to the mad and ragged dervish in the streets. Our cicerone keeps a book,
in which the names of all his English guests have been from time to time
inscribed. His visitors have been principally officers from Gibraltar,
who come here for a few days sporting. On the bombardment of Tangier,
Ben left the country with other fugitives. The Moorish rabble plundered
his house; and many valuables which were there concealed, pledged by
persons belonging to Tangier, were carried away; Ben was therefore
ruined. Some foolish people at Gibraltar told Ben, that the streets of
London were paved with gold, or, at any rate, that, inasmuch as he (Ben)
had in his time entertained so many Englishmen at his hospitable
establishment at Tangier (for which, however, he was well paid), he
would be sure to make his fortune by a visit to England. I afterwards
met Ben accidentally in the streets of London, in great distress. Some
friends of the Anti-Slavery Society subscribed a small sum for him, and
sent him back to his family in Gibraltar. Poor Ben was astonished to
find as much misery in the streets of our own metropolis, as in any town
of Morocco. Regarding his co-religionists in England, Ben observed with
bitterness, "The Jews there are no good; they are very blackguards." He
was disappointed at their want of liberality, as well as their want of
sympathy for Morocco Jews. Ben thought he knew everything, and the ways
of this wicked world, but this visit to England convinced him he must
begin the world over again. Our cicerone is very shrewd; withal is
blessed with a good share of common sense; is by no means bigoted
against Mahometans or Christians, and is one of the more respectable of
the Barbary Jews. His information on Morocco, is, however, so mixed up
with the marvellous, that only a person well acquainted with North
Africa can distinguish the probable from the improbable, or separate the
wheat from the chaff. Ben has a large family, like most of the Maroquine
Jews; but the great attraction of his family is a most beautiful
daughter, with a complexion of jasmine, and locks of the raven; a
perfect Rachel in loveliness, proving fully the assertion of Ali Bey,
and all other travellers in Morocco, that the fairest women in this
country are the Jewesses. Ben is the type of many a Barbary Jew, who, to
considerable intelligence, and a few grains of what may be called fair
English honesty, unites the ordinarily deteriorated character of men,
and especially Jews, bora and brought up under oppressive governments.
Ben would sell you to the Emperor for a moderate price; and so would the
Jewish consular agents of Morocco. A traveller in this country must,
therefore, never trust a Maroquine Jew in a matter of vital importance.

Mr. Drummond Hay, our Consul at Tangier, advised me to return to
Gibraltar, and to go by sea to Mogador, and thence to Morocco, where the
Emperor was then residing. Adopting his advice, I left the same evening
for Gibraltar. I took my passage in a very fine cutter, which had
formerly been a yacht, and had since been engaged as a smuggler of
Spanish goods. I confess, I was not sorry to hear that the Spanish
custom-house was often duped. The cutter had been purchased for the
Gibraltar secret service.

The Anti-Slavery Society had placed at my disposal a few yards of green
cloth, for a present to the minister of the Emperor. At the custom-house
of Havre-de-Grace, I paid a heavy duty on it. But, when I got to Irun,
on the Spanish frontier, (having determined to come through Spain in
order to see the country), the custom-house officers demanded a duty
nearly double the cost of the cloth in London, so that there was no
alternative but to leave it in their possession. The only satisfaction,
or revenge which I had, was that of calling them _ladrones_ in the
presence of a mob of people, who, to do justice to the Spanish populace,
all took my part.

When I complained of this conduct at Madrid, my friends laughed at my
simplicity, and told me I was "green" in Spanish; and in travelling
through "the land of chivalry," and of "ingeniosos hildagos," ought, on
the contrary, to thank God that I had arrived safe at Madrid with a
dollar in my pocket; whilst they kindly hinted, if I should really get
through the province of Andalusia safe to Cadiz, without being stripped
of everything, I must record it in my journal as a miracle of good luck.
This was, however, exaggeration. I had no reason to complain of anything
else during the time I was in Spain. My fellow travellers (all
Spaniards), nevertheless, rebuked me for want of tact. "You ought," they
said, "to have given a few pesetas to the guard of the diligencia, who
would have taken charge of your cloth, and kept it from going through
the custom-house."

On reaching Gibraltar, I made the acquaintance of Frenerry, who for
thirty years has been a merchant in Morocco. Mr. Frenerry had frequent
opportunities of personal intercourse with Muley Abd Errahman, and had
more influence with him than the British Consul. Indeed, at all times, a
merchant is always more welcome to his Imperial Highness than a
diplomatic agent, who usually is charged with some disagreeable mission.
Mr. Frenerry was called, par excellence, "the merchant of the West." Of
course, Mr. Frenerry's opinions must be valuable on Maroquine affairs.
He says:--"The Morocco Moors like the English very much, and better than
any other Europeans, for they know the English to be their best friends.
At the same time, the Moors feel their weakness. They know also, that a
day might come when the English would be against them, or have disputes
with them, as in days past. The Moors are, therefore, jealous of the
English, though they consider them their friends; and do not like
Englishmen more than any other Christians to travel in their country. In
other respects, if well managed and occasionally coaxed or bribed with a
present, the Moors are very good natured, and as tractable as children."

However, I find since the murder of Mr. Davidson, both the people and
government of Morocco have got a bad name in Gibraltar; and opinion
begins to prevail that it is almost impossible for an Englishman to
travel in the country. Mr. Frenerry recommends that a Moor should be
treated not proudly, but with a certain degree of firmness, to shew him
you will not be trifled with. In this way, he says, you will always
continue friends.

With regard to the present Emperor, Mr. Frenerry is a great apologist of
his system.

"The Emperor is obliged to exclude foreigners as much as possible from
his country. He does not want to tempt the cupidity of Europeans, by
showing them the resources of the empire. They are prying about for
mines of iron and silver. He is obliged to forbid these geological
wanderings. The subjects of his empire are divided in their feelings and
interests, and have been driven there by every wave of human
revolutions. The Emperor does not wish to discover his weakness abroad,
by letting Europeans witness the bad faith and disloyalty of his
heterogeneous tribes. The European consuls are much to blame; they
always carry their heads too high, if not insolently. They then appoint
Jewish consuls along the coast, a class of men whom the hereditary
prejudices of his Mussulman subjects will not respect."

There is certainly something, if not a good deal, to be said _for_ the
emperor as well as _against_ him. I was obliged to wait some time at
Gibraltar before I could get a vessel for Mogador. I missed one
excellent opportunity from the want of a note from the Gibraltar
government. A Moor offered to allow me to take a passage without any
expense in his vessel, provided I could obtain a note from our
government; but the Governor of Gibraltar required an introduction in
form, and, before I could receive a letter from Mr. Hay to present to
him, the vessel left for Mogador. I therefore lost money and time
without any necessity.




CHAPTER IV.

Departure from Gibraltar to Mogador.--The Straits.--Genoese Sailors.--
Trade-wind Hurricanes en the Atlantic Coast of Morocco.--Difficulties of
entering the Port of Mogador.--Bad provisioning of Foreign
Merchantmen.--The present Representative of the once far-famed and
dreaded Rovers.--Disembarkation at Mogador.--Mr. Phillips, Captain of
the Port--Rumours amongst the People about my Mission.--Visit to the
Cemeteries.--Maroquine Wreckers.--Health of the inhabitants of
Mogador.--Moorish Cavaliers "playing at powder" composed of the ancient
Nuraidians.--The Barb.--The Life Guards of the Moorish Emperor.--Martial
character of the Negro.--Some account of the Black Corps of the
Shereefs.--Orthodoxy of the Shereefs, and illustrative anecdotes of the
various Emperors.


On leaving the Straits (commonly called "The Gut,") a noble sight
presented itself--a fleet of some hundred merchantmen, all smacking
about before the rising wind, crowding every sail, lest it should change
ere they got clear of the obstructive straits. Many weeks had they been
detained by the westerly gales, and our vessel amongst the rest. I felt
the poignant misery of "waiting for the wind." I know nothing so
wearisome when all things are made ready. It is worse than hope
deferred, which sickens and saddens the heart.

I have lately seen some newspaper reports, that government is preparing
a couple of steam-tugs, to be placed at the mouth of the straits, to tow
ships in and out. We may trust it will be done. But if government do it
not, I am sure it would answer the purpose of a private company, and I
have no doubt such speculation will soon be taken up. Vessels freighted
with perishable cargoes are often obliged to wait weeks, nay months, at
the mouth of the Straits, to the great injury of commerce. In our days
of steam and rapid communication, this cannot be tolerated. [13]

After a voyage of four days, we found ourselves off the coast of
Mogador. The wind had been pretty good, but we had suffered some delay
from a south wind, which headed us for a short time. We prayed for a
westerly breeze, of which we soon got enough from west and north-west.
The first twelve hours it came gently on, but gradually increased till
it blew a gale. The captain was suddenly called up in the night, as
though the ship was going to sink, or could sink, whilst she was running
as fast as we would let her before the wind. But the real danger lay in
missing the coast of Mogador, or not being able to get within its port
from the violence of the breakers near the shore. Our vessel was a small
Genoese brig; and, though the Genoese are the best sailors in the
Mediterranean--even superior to the Greeks, who rank next--our captain
and his crew began to quake. At daylight, the coast-line loomed before
us, immersed in fog, and two hours after, the tall minaret of the great
mosque of Mogador, shooting erect, a dull lofty pyramid, stood over the
thick haze lying on the lower part of the coast.

This phenomenon of the higher objects and mountains being visible over a
dense fog on the shore, is frequent on this side of the Atlantic. Wind
also prevails here. It scarcely ever rains, but wind the people have
nine months out of the twelve. It is a species of trade-wind, which
commences at the Straits, or the coasts of Spain and Portugal, and
sweeps down north-west with fury, making the entire coast of Morocco a
mountain-barrier of breakers, increasing in its course, and extending as
far as Wadnoun, Cape Bajdor, Cape Blanco, even to the Senegal. It does
not, however, extend far out at sea, being chiefly confined to the coast
range. Our alarm now was lest we should get within the clutches of this
fell swoop, for the port once past, it would have required us weeks to
bear up again, whilst this wind lasted.

The Atlantic coast of Morocco is an indented or waving line, and there
are only two or three ports deserving the name of harbours--harbours of
refuge from these storms. Unlike the western coast of Ireland, so finely
indented by the Atlantic wave, this portion of the Morocco coast is
rounded off by the ocean.

Our excitement was great. The capitano began yelping like a cowardly
school-boy, who has been well punched by a lesser and more courageous
antagonist. Immediately I got on deck, I produced an English book, which
mentioned the port of Mogador as a "good" port.

"Per Dio Santo!" exclaimed our capitano; "yes, for the English it _is_ a
good port--you dare devils at sea--for them it _is_ a good port. The
open sea, with a gale of wind, is a good port for the _maladetti_
English."

Irritated at this extreme politeness to our gallant tars, who have so
long "braved the battle and the breeze," I did not trouble farther the
dauntless Genoese, who certainly was not destined to become a Columbus.
Now the men began to snivel and yelp, following the example of their
commander. "We won't go into the port, Santa Virgine! We won't go in to
be shivered to pieces on the rocks." At this moment our experienced
capitano fancied we had got into shoal-water; the surf was seen running
in foaming circles, as if in a whirlpool. Now, indeed, our capitano did
yelp; now did the crew yelp, invoking all the saints of the Roman
calendar, instead of attending to the ship. [14] Here was a scene of
indescribable confusion. Our ship was suddenly put round and back.

My fellow passengers, a couple of Jews from Gibraltar, began swearing at
the capitano and his brave men. One of them, whilst cursing, thought it
just as well, at the same time, to call upon Father Abraham. Our little
brig pitched her bows two or three times under water like a storm-bird,
and did _not_ ground. It was seen to be a false alarm. The capitano now
took courage on seeing all the flags flying over the fortifications, it
being Friday, the Mahometan Sabbath. The silly fellow had heard, that
the port authorities always hauled down their colours, when the entrance
to the harbour was unsafe by reason of bad weather. Seeing the colours,
he imagined all was right.

There are two entrances to the port of Mogador; one from the south,
which is quite open; the other from the north-west, which is only a
narrow passage, with scarcely room to admit a ship-of-the-line. The
'Suffren,' in which the Prince de Joinville commanded the bombardment of
the town, stood right over this entrance, on the northern channel,
having south-east the Isle of Mogador, and north-west the coast of the
Continent. The Prince took up a bold and critical position, exposed to
violent currents, to grounding on a rocky bottom, and to many other
serious accidents. [15]

[Illustration]

As we neared this difficult entrance, we were all in a state of the most
feverish excitement, expecting, such was the fury of the breakers, to be
thrown on the rock on either side. Thus, it was a veritable Scylla and
Charybdis. A man from the rigging descried several small vessels moored
snugly behind the isle. We ventured in with breathless agitation. A man
from one of the fortifications, guessing or seeing, I suppose, our
timidity and bad seamenship, cried out at the top of his lungs, "Salvo!"
which being interpreted, meant, "The entrance is safe."

But this was not enough; we were to have another trial of patience. The
foolish captain--to terrify us to the last--had to cast his anchor, as a
matter of course; and imagine, dear reader, our alarm, our terror, when
we heard him scream out, "The chain is snapped!" We were now to be
driven out southwards by the fury of the wind, which had become a
hurricane, no very agreeable prospect! Happily, also this was a false
alarm. The capitano then came up to me, to shake hands, apologize, and
present congratulations on our safe harbouring. The perspiration of
fever and a heated brain was coursing down his cheeks. The capitano lit
an extra candle before the picture of the Virgin below, and observed to
me, whilst the men were saying their prayers of gratitude for
deliverance, "Per un miraculo della santissima Vergina; noi sciamo
salvati!"--(we are saved by a miracle of the Most Holy Virgin!) which,
of course, I did not or could not dispute, allowing, as I do, all men in
such circumstances, to indulge freely in their peculiar faith, so long
as it does not interfere with me or mine.

It is well that our merchant-vessels have never been reduced to the
condition of Genoese craft, or been manned by such chicken-hearted
crews. I believe the pusillanimity of the latter is traceable, in a
great measure, to the miserable way in which the poor fellows are fed.
These Genoese had no meat whilst I was with them. I sailed once in a
Neapolitan vessel, a whole month, during which time the crew lived on
horse-beans, coarse maccaroni, Sardinian fish, mouldy biscuit, and
griping black wine. Meat they had none. How is it possible for men thus
fed, to fight and wrestle with the billows and terrors of the deep?

We had no ordinary task to get on shore; the ocean was without, but a
sea was within port. The wind increased with such fury, that we
abandoned for the day the idea of landing. We had, however, specie on
board, which it was necessary forthwith to land. Mr. Philips, captain of
the port, and a merchant's clerk, therefore, came alongside with great
difficulty in a Moorish boat, to take on shore the specie; and in it I
embarked. This said barque was the miserable but apt representation of
the by-gone formidable Maroquine navy, which, not many centuries ago,
pushed its audacity to such lengths, that the "rovers of Salee" cruised
off the English coast, and defied the British fleets. Now the whole
naval force of the once-dreaded piratic states of Barbary can hardly
boast of two or three badly-manned brigs or frigates. As to Morocco, the
Emperor has not a single captain who can conduct a vessel from Mogador
to Gibraltar.

The most skilful _rais_ his ports can furnish made an attempt lately,
and was blown up and down for months on the coasts of Spain and
Portugal, being at last driven into the Straits by almost miraculous
interposition.

What was this Moorish boat in which I went on shore? A mere long shell
of bad planks, and scarcely more ship-shape than the trunk of a tree
hollowed into a canoe, leakily put together. It was filled with dirty,
ragged, half-naked sailors, whose seamanship did not extend beyond
coming and going from vessels lying in this little port. Each of these
Mogadorian port sailors had a bit of straight pole for an oar; the way
in which they rowed was equally characteristic. Struggling against wind
and current with their Moorish rais at the helm, encouraging their
labours by crying out first one thing, then another, as his fancy
dictated, the crew repeated in chorus all he said:--"Khobsah!" (a loaf)
cried the rais.

All the men echoed "Khobsah."

"A loaf you shall have when you return!" cried the rais.

"A loaf we shall have when we return!" cried the men.

"Pull, pull; God hears and sees you!" cried the rais.

"We pull, we pull; God hears and sees us!" cried the men.

"Sweetmeats, sweetmeats, by G--; sweetmeats by G--you shall have, only
pull away!" swore the rais.

"Sweetmeats we shall have, thank God! sweetmeats we shall have, thank
God!" roared the men, all screaming and bawling. In this unique style,
after struggling three hours to get three miles over the port, we
landed, all of us completely exhausted and drowned in spray.

It is usual for Moors, particularly negroes, to sing certain choruses,
and thus encourage one another in their work. What, however, is
remarkable, these choruses are mostly on sacred subjects, being
frequently the formula of their confession, "There is no God, but one
God, and Mahomet is his Prophet," &c. These clownish tars were deeply
coloured, and some quite black. I found, in fact, the greatest part of
the Moorish population of Mogador coloured persons. We may here easily
trace the origin of the epithet "Black-a-Moor," and we are not so
surprised that Shakspeare made his Moor black; indeed, the present
Emperor, Muley Abd Errahman, is of very dark complexion, though his
features are not at all of the negro cast. But he has sons quite black,
and with negro features, who, of course, are the children of negresses.
One of these, is Governor of Rabat. In no country is the colour of the
human skin so little thought of. This is a very important matter in the
question of abolition. There is no objection to the skin and features of
the negro; it is only the luxury of having slaves, or their usefulness
for heavy work, which weighs in the scale against abolition.

As soon as we landed, we visited the lieutenant-governor, who
congratulated us on not being carried down to the Canary Islands. Then
his Excellency asked, in due studied form:

"Where do you come from?"

_Traveller_.--"Gibraltar."

_His Excellency_.--"Where are you going?"

_Traveller_.--"To see the Sultan, Muley Abd Errahman."

_His Excellency_.--"What's your business?"

_Traveller_.--"I will let your Excellency know to-morrow."

I then proceeded to the house of Mr. Phillips, where I took up my
quarters. Mr. Willshire, our vice-consul, was absent, having gone up to
Morocco with all the principal merchants of Mogador, to pay a visit to
the Emperor.

The port of Mogador had to-day a most wild and desolate appearance,
which was rendered still more dreary and hideous by a dark tempest
sweeping over it. On the shore, there was no appearance of life, much
less of trade and shipping. All had abandoned it, save a guard, who lay
stretched at the gate of the waterport, like a grim watch-dog. From this
place, we proceeded to the merchants' quarter of the town, which was
solitary and immersed in profound gloom. Altogether, my first
impressions of Mogador were most unfavourable, I went to bed and dreamt
of winds and seas, and struggled with tempests the greater part of the
night. Then I was shipwrecked off the Canaries; thrown on the coast of
Wadnoun, and made a slave by the wild Arabs wandering in the Desert--I
awoke.

Mr. Phillips, mine host, soon became my right-hand man. His
extraordinary character, and the adventures of his life are worth a
brief notice. Phillips said he was descended from those York Jews, who,
on refusing to pay a contribution levied on them by one of our most
Christian kings, had a tooth drawn out every morning (without the aid of
chloroform), until they satisfied the cruel avarice of the tyrant. In
person, Phillips was a smart old gentleman, with the ordinary lineaments
of his race stamped on his countenance. The greater part of his life has
been spent in South America, where he attained the honours of
aide-de-camp to Bolivar. In those sanguinary revolutions, heaving with
the birth of the young republic, he had often been shut up in the
capilla to be shot, and was rescued always by the Jesuit fathers, who
pitied and saved the poor Jew, on his expressing himself favourable to
Christianity. Returning to England, after twenty years' absence, his
mother did not fully recognize him, until he one day got up and admired,
with youthful ardour, a china figure on the chimney-piece, which had
been his toy in his boyhood. On the occurrence of this little domestic
incident, the mother passionately embraced her lost prodigal, once dead,
but now "alive again." Phillips came to Mogador on a military
speculation, and offered to take the command of the Emperor's cavalry
against all his enemies.

This audacity of a Jew filled the Moor with alarm. "How could a Jew, who
was not a devil, propose such an insult to the Commander of the
Faithful, as to presume to take the charge of his invincible warriors!"
Nevertheless, the little fellow weathered the storm, and got appointed
"captain of the port of Mogador," with the liberal salary of about
thirty shillings per month; but this did not prevent our aide-de-camp,
now metamorphosed into a sea captain, from wearing _an admiral's_
uniform, which he obtained in a curious way on a visit to England. He
met in the streets of London with an acquaintance, who pretended to
patronize him. The gentleman jokingly said, "Well, Phillips, I must give
you an uniform, since you are appointed captain of the port of Mogador."
The said gentleman received, a few months afterwards, when his quondam
protege was safe with his uniform strutting about Mogador, to the
amazement of the Moors, and the delight of his co-religionists, a bill
of thirty pounds or so, charged for "a suit of admiral's uniform for Mr.
Phillips, captain of the port of Mogador;" and found that a joke
sometimes has a serious termination.

Phillips, on his first arrival in this country, entered into a
diplomatic contest with the Moorish authorities, demanding the
privileges of a native British-born Jew, and he determined to ride a
horse, in order to vindicate the rights of British Jews, before the
awful presence of the Shereefian Court! About this business, the
Consul-general Hay is said to have written eleven long, and Mr.
Willshire about twenty-one short and pithy despatches, but the affair
ended in smoke. Phillips, with great magnanimity and self-denial,
consented to relinquish the privilege, on the prayer of his brethren,
natives of Mogador, who were very naturally afraid, lest the incensed
Emperor might visit on them what he durst not inflict on the
British-born Jew.

Of the achievements of Phillips in the way of science (for he assures he
is born to the high destiny of enlightening both barbarians and
civilized nations) I take the liberty, with his permission, of
mentioning one. Phillips brought here a pair of horse-shoes belonging to
a drayhorse of the firm of Truman, Hanbury, Buxton, and Co., to astonish
the Moors by their size, who are great connoisseurs of horse-flesh. The
Moors protested their unbelief, and swore it was a lie,--"such shoes
never shod a horse." Phillips then got a skeleton of a head from
England. This they also scouted as an imposition, alleging that Phillips
had got it purposely made to deceive them. "Although they believed in
the Prophet, whom they never saw, they were still not such fools as to
believe in everything which an Infidel might bring to their country."
Phillips now gave up, in despair, the attempt to propagate science among
the Moors.

Our ancient aide-de-camp of Bolivar is a liberal English Jew, and boasts
that, on Christmas-day, he always has his roast-beef and plum-pudding. I
supped with him often on a sucking-pig, for the Christians breed pigs in
this place, to the horror of pious Mussulmen. This amusing adventurer
subsequently left Mogador and went to Lisbon, where he purposed writing
a memorial to the Archbishop of Canterbury, containing the plan, of a
New Unitarian system of religion, by which the Jews might be brought
within the pale of the Christian Church!

For some time I felt the effects of my sea voyage; my apartment rocked
in my brain. People speculated about the objects of my mission; the most
absurd rumours were afloat. "The Christian has come to settle the
affairs of Mr. Darman, whom the Emperor killed," some said. Others
remarked, "The Christian has come to buy all the slaves of the country,
in order to liberate them." The lieutenant-governor sent for Phillips,
to know what I came for, who I was, and how I passed my time? Phillips
told him all about my mission, and that I was a great taleb. When
Phillips mentioned to the governor, that Great Britain had paid a
hundred millions of dollars for the liberation of slaves belonging to
Englishmen, his Excellency, struck with astonishment, exclaimed, "The
English Sultan is inspired by God!"

[Illustration.]

I visited the burying-place of Christians, situate on the north-side of
the town by the sea-shore. A fine tomb was erected here to the memory of
Mrs. Willshire's father. The ignorant country people coming to Mogador
stopped to repeat prayers before it, believing it the tomb of some
favourite saint. The government, hearing of this idolatry to a
Christian, begged Mr. Willshire to have the tomb covered with cement.
When this was done, so perverse are these people, that they partially
divested it of covering, and chipped off pieces of marble for their
women, who ground them into powder, and dusted their faces with it to
make them fair. Every six months it is necessary to replaster the tomb.
This cemetery is the most desolate place the mind of man can conceive.
There is no green turf here to rest lightly on the bosom of the dead! No
tree, no cypress of mourning; no shade or shelter for those who seek to
indulge in grief. All is a sandy desolation, swept by the wild winds of
the solitary shore of the ocean.

[Illustration]

Farther on, is the Moorish cemetery, which I passed through. What a
spectacle of human corruption! Here, indeed, we may learn to despise
this world's poor renown, and cease tormenting ourselves with vain and
godless pursuits. It was then sunset, the moon had risen far up on the
fading brow of the departing day, casting pale lights and fearful
shadows over this house of the dead. It was time to return, or the gates
of the city would shut me out amidst the wreck of poor human dust and
bones. I saw, moving in the doubtful shadows of approaching night, the
grave-digging hyaena!

It is an ill wind that blows nobody good. The wreckers of this coast
boldly assert that a shipwreck is a blessing (_berkah_), sent to them by
Providence. The port authorities have even the impudence to declare,
that to erect lighthouses at the mouth of the ports would be thwarting
the decrees of Divine Providence! In spite of all this, however, at the
urgent request of Mr. Willshire, when, on one occasion, the weather was
very bad, the governor of Mogador stationed guards on various parts of
the coast to preserve the lives and property of shipwrecked vessels. But
I do not think I have heard worse cases of Moorish wreckers, than those
which have happened not very many years ago on the French and English
coasts. Some of my readers will recollect the case of an Indiaman
wrecked off the coast of France, when poor ladies in a state of
suspended animation, had their fingers cut off to get possession of
their diamond-rings. During my stay at Mogador, a courier arrived from
Sous, bringing the news of some Christians being wrecked off the coast,
A Jew had purchased one poor fellow from the Arabs for two camels. Two
others were dead, their bodies cast upon the inhospitable beach by the
Atlantic surge, where they lay unburied, to be mangled by the wild
tribes, or to feed the hungry hyaena.

Some of the merchants came hither from the capital; amongst the rest,
Mr. and Mrs. Elton, they, as well as others, brought a favourable
account of the Emperor and his ministers, and lauded very much the
commercial policy of the governor of Mogador. Moderation, it is said, is
the characteristic of the court's proceedings towards the merchants.
Trade was not very brisk, it being the rainy season, when the Arabs are
occupied with sowing the ground; the busy time is from September to
January.

The produce sold at that time was simply that which is left of the past
season, having been kept back with the object of getting a better price
for it. Gum is brought in great quantities for exportation. An immense
quantity of sugar is imported, a third of which is loaf beet-root sugar
brought from Marseilles.

Mr. Phillips came to me, to beg ten thousand pardons for having only
fowls for dinner. One morning two bullocks were killed by the Jews, but
not "according to the Law," and the greater part of the Jews that day
would have to go without meat. On these occasions, the Jews sell their
meat to the Moors and Christians at a reduced price. Phillips observed,
"I am obliged to eat meat according to the Law, or I should have no
peace of my life."

A good many people were affected by colds, but the climate of Mogador is
reckoned very good. All the year round there is not much variation; N.W.
and N.E. winds bring cold in winter, and cool refreshing breezes in
summer. There was not a single medical man in Mogador, although there
were some fifty Europeans, including Jews. Some years ago a clever young
man was practising here. For one year, each European paid his share of
salary; but alas! those whom God blessed with good health, refused to
pay their quota to the support of a physician for their sickly
neighbours, consequently, every European's life was in the greatest
danger, should a serious accident occur to them. With regard to money,
they would prefer a broken leg all their life time to paying five pounds
to have it set. The consuls of Tangier subscribe for a resident
physician.

[Illustration.]

One afternoon, I went to see the Moorish cavalry "playing at powder,"
(Lab Elbaroud) being a stirring and novel scene. A troop of these
haughty cavaliers assembled with their chiefs almost daily on the playa,
or parade. Then they divided themselves into parties of twenty or
thirty; proceeding with their manoeuvres, the cavaliers at first advance
slowly in a single line, then canter, and then gallop, spurring on the
horse to its last gasp, meantime standing up erect on their
shovel-stirrups, and turning from one side to the other; looking round
with an air of defiance, they fire off their matchlocks, throw
themselves into various dexterous attitudes, sometimes letting fall the
bridle. The pieces being discharged, the horses instantaneously stop.
The most difficult lesson a barb learns, is to halt suddenly in mid
career of a full gallop. To discharge his matchlock, standing on the
stirrups while the horse is in full gallop, is the great lesson of
perfection of the Maroquine soldiery. The cavaliers now wheel out of the
way for the next file, returning reloading, and taking their places to
gallop off and fire again. Crowds of people attend these equestrian
exhibitions, of which they are passionately fond. They squat round the
parade in double or treble rows, muffled up within their bournouses, in
mute admiration. Occasionally women are present, but females here join
in very few out-door amusements. When a whole troop of cavaliers are
thus manoeuvering, galloping at the utmost stretch of the horses'
muscles, the men screaming and hallowing "hah! hah! hah!" the dust and
sand rising in clouds before the foaming fiery barb, with the deafening
noise and confusion of a simultaneous discharge of firelocks, the
picture represents in vivid colours what might be conceived of the wild
Nubian cavalry of ancient Africa. [16] Today there was a mishap; several
cavaliers did not keep up the line. The chief leading the troops, cried
out in a rage, and with the voice of a senator, "Fools! madmen! are you
children, or are ye men?" Christians or Jews standing too near, are
frequently pushed back with violence; and we were told "not to stand in
the way of Mussulmen."

These cavaliers are sometimes called _spahis_; they are composed of
Moors, Arabs, Berbers, and all the native races in Morocco. They are
usually plainly dressed, but, beneath the bournouse, many of them wear
the Moorish dress, embroidered in the richest style. Some of the horses
are magnificently caparisoned in superb harness, worked in silk and
gold. Fine harness is one of the luxuries of North Africa, and is still
much used, even in Tunis and Tripoli, where the new system of European
military dress and tactics has been introduced. The horse is the sacred
animal of Morocco, as well as the safeguard of the empire. The Sultan
has no other military defence, except the natural difficulties of the
country, or the hatred of his people to strangers. He does not permit
the exportation of horses, nor of barley, on which they are often fed.
[17]

But the defeat of the Emperor's eldest son, Sidi Mahomed, at the Battle
of Isly, who commanded upwards of forty thousand of these cavaliers, has
thrown a shade over the ancient celebrity of this Moorish corps, and
these proud horsemen have since become discouraged. On that fatal day,
however, none of the black bodyguard of the Emperor was brought into
action. These muster some thirty thousand strong. This corps, or the
Abeed-Sidi-Bokhari, [18] are soldiers who possess the most cool and
undaunted courage; retreat with them is never thought of. Unlike the
Janissaries of old, their sole ambition is to _obey_, and not to _rule_
their sovereign. This fidelity to the Shereefs remains unshaken through
all the shocks of the empire, and to the person of the Emperor they are
completely devoted. In a country like Morocco, of widely distinct races
and hostile tribes, all naturally detesting each other, the Emperor
finds in them his only safety. I cannot withhold the remark, that this
body-guard places before us the character of the negro in a very
favourable light. He is at once brave and faithful, the two essential
ingredients in the formation and development of heroic natures.

It will, I trust, not be deemed out of place to consider for a moment
the warlike propensities and qualities of the negro. Every European who
has penetrated Africa, confesses to the bellicose disposition of the
negro, having seen him engaged with others in perpetual conflict. The
choice and retention of a body-guard of Blacks by the Moorish Emperor,
also triumphantly prove the martial nature of the negro race. But the
negro has signally displayed the military qualities of coolness and
courage in many instances, two or three of which I shall here take the
liberty of mentioning, in connexion with the affairs of Algeria.

Mr. Lord relates, on the authority of the French, that, when the
invading army invested Fort de l'Empereur, and had silenced all its
guns, the Dey ordered the Turkish General to retreat to the Kasbah, and
leave three negroes to blow up the fort. It seemed, therefore,
abandoned, but two red flags floated still on its outward line of
defence, and a third on the angle towards the city. The French continued
all their efforts towards effecting a practicable breach. Three negroes
were now seen calmly walking on the ramparts, and from time to time
looking over as if examining the progress of the breach. One of them,
struck by a cannonball, fell; and the others, as if to avenge his death,
ran to a cannon, pointed it, and fired three shots. At the third, the
gun turned over, and they were unable to replace it. They tried another,
and as they were in the act of raising it, a shot swept the legs from
under one of them. The remaining negro gazed for a moment on his
comrade, drew him a little aside, left him, and once more examined the
breach. He then snatched one of the flags, and retired to the interior
of the tower. In a few minutes, he re-appeared, took a second flag and
descended. The French continued their cannonade, and the breach appeared
almost practicable, when suddenly they were astounded by a terrific
explosion, which shook the whole ground as with an earthquake. An
immense column of smoke, mixed with streaks of flames, burst from the
centre of the fortress; masses of solid masonry were hurled into the air
to an amazing height, while cannon, stones, timbers, projectiles, and
dead bodies were scattered in every direction. What was all this? The
negro had done his duty--the fort was blown up!

In a skirmish near Mascara, one of Abd-el-Kader's negro soldiers killed
two Frenchmen with his own hand. The Emir, who was an eye-witness of his
bravery, rewarded him on the field of battle by presenting him with his
own sword and the Cross of the Crescent, the only military order in the
service, and which is never awarded except fur a very distinguished
action. Colonel Scott says the black was presented to him, and seemed as
proud of the honour conferred on him as if he had been made a K.G.C.B.

In the strifes and disputes for succession that have characterized the
history of the Barbary princes, and reddened their annals with blood,
nothing has been more remarkable than the fidelity of the negroes to
their respective masters, and the bravery with which they have defended
them to the last hour of their reign or existence. When all his
partisans have deserted a pretender, when the soldiers of the successful
competitor to the throne have been in the act of pouncing upon the
fallen or falling prince, a handful of brave followers has rushed to the
rescue, and surrounded the person of their beloved leader, pouring out
their life-blood in his defence--and these men were negroes! To use a
vulgar metaphor, the negro will defend his master with the savage
courage and tenacity of a bull-dog. And this is the principal reason
which has induced the despotic princes of North Africa to cherish the
negroes, of whom they have encouraged a continual supply from the
interior.

The history of this Imperial Guard of Negroes is interesting, as showing
the inconveniences as well as the advantage of such a corps, for these
troops have not been always so well conducted as they are at present. At
one time, the Shereefs claimed a species of sovereignty over the city of
Timbuctbo and the adjacent countries. In the year 1727, Muley Ismail
determined to re-people his wasted districts by a colony of negroes. His
secret object was, however, to form a body guard to keep his own people
in check, a sort of black Swiss regiment, so alike is the policy of all
tyrants. In a few years, these troops exceeded 100,000 men. Finding
their numbers so great, and their services so much needed by the Sultan,
they became exigeant and rapacious, dictating to their royal master.
Muley Abdallah was deposed six times by them. Finding their yoke
intolerable, the Sultan decimated them by sending them to fight in the
mountains. Others were disbanded for the same reasons by Sidi Mohammed.
Still, the effect of this new colonization was beneficially experienced
throughout the country. The Moors taking the black women as concubines,
a mixed race of industrious people sprang up, and gave an impetus to the
empire. It is questionable, however, if North Africa could he colonized
by negroes. By mixing with the Caucasian race, this experiment partly
succeeded. But in general, North Africa is too bleak and uncongenial for
the negroes' nature during winter. The negro race does not increase of
itself on this coast. Their present number is kept up by a continual
supply of slaves. When this is stopped, coloured people will begin
gradually to disappear.

It is unnecessary to tell my readers that the Shereefs are very
sensitive on matters of religion; but an anecdote or two may amuse them.
A French writer expatiating in true Gallic style, calls Morocco the
"arriere-garde en Afrique of Islamism," and "une de ses armees de
reserve." Indeed, the coasts and cities of Morocco are inundated with
saints of every description and degree of sanctity. Morocco, in fact, is
not only the _classic_ land of Marabouts, but their home and haunt, and
sphere of agitation. There are ten thousand Abd-el-Kaders and Bou Mazas
all disputing authority with the High Priest, who sits on the green
throne of the Shereefs. Sometimes they assume the character of
demagogues, and inveigh against the rapacity and corruption of the court
and government. At others they appear as prophets, prophets of ill, by
preaching boldly the Holy war.

The French in Africa now furnish them with an everlasting theme of
denunciation. From Morocco they travel eastwards, filling the Sahara and
the Atlas with the odours of their holy reputation. So that religious
light, like that of civilization, is now moving from the
west--eastwards, instead of, as in times past, from the east--eastwards.
The Maroquine Mahometans may be cited as a case in point. They find too
frequently only the form of religion in the east, as we do in the
eastern churches. They are beginning to assault Mecca as we have
assaulted Jerusalem.

Now for an anecdote or two illustrative of the high state of orthodoxy
professed by the Shereefs. Some time ago, a number of handkerchiefs were
brought, or rather smuggled into Mogador, having printed upon them
passages from the Koran. One of them got into the hands of the Emperor,
who thinking the Christians were ridiculing the Sacred Book, ordered
instanter all the cities of the coast to be searched to discover the
offender who introduced them. Happily for the merchant he was not found
out. His Highness commanded that all the handkerchiefs which were
collected should be destroyed. When Mr. Davidson was at Morocco, he
prescribed some Seidlitz water for the use of the Sultan, and placed on
the sides of two bottles, containing the beverage, Arabic verses from
the Koran. The Sultan was exceedingly exasperated at this compliment to
his religion, and had it privately intimated to Mr. Davidson not to
desecrate the Holy Book in that abominable manner. The latter then very
prudently gave up to the minister all the printed verses he had brought
with him, which were concealed from public view. But if some of these
emperors are so rigid and scrupulous, there are others more liberal and
tolerant.

Muley Suleiman was a great admirer of the European character, and was
much attached to a Mr. Leyton, an English merchant. This merchant was
one day riding out of the city of Mogador, when an old woman rushed at
him, seized the bridle of his horse, and demanded alms. The merchant
pushed her away with his whip. The ancient dame seeing herself so rudely
nonsuited, went off screaming revenge; and although she had not had a
tooth in her head for twenty long years, she noised about town that Mr.
Leyton had knocked two of her teeth out, and importuned the Governor to
obtain her some pecuniary indemnification.

His Excellency advised Mr. Leyton to comply, and get rid of the
annoyance of the old woman. He resolutely refused, and the Governor was
obliged to report the case to the Emperor, as the old lady had made so
many partisans in Mogador as to threaten a disturbance. His Imperial
Highness wrote a letter to the merchant, condescendingly begging him to
supply the old woman with "two silver teeth," meaning thereby to give
her a trifling present in money. Mr. Leyton, being as obstinate as ever,
was ordered to appear before the Emperor at Morocco. Here the resolute
merchant declared that he had not knocked the teeth out of the old
woman's head, she had had none for years, and he would not be maligned
even in so small a matter.

The Emperor was at his wits' end, and endeavoured to smooth down the
contumacious Leyton, to save his capital from insurrection; imploring
him to comply with the Lex talionis, [19] and have two of his teeth
drawn if he was inflexibly determined not to pay. The poor Emperor was
in hourly dread of a revolution about this tooth business, and at the
same time he knew the merchant had spoken the truth. Strange to say, Mr.
Leyton at last consented to lose his teeth rather than his money.
However, on the merchant's return from the capital to Mogador, to his
surprise, and no doubt to his satisfaction, he found that two ship-loads
of grain had been ordered to be delivered to him by the Emperor, in
compensation for the two teeth which he had had punched out to satisfy
the exigencies of the Empire.




CHAPTER V.

Several visits from the Moors; their ideas on soldiers and payment of
public functionaries.--Mr. Cohen and his opinion on Maroquine Affairs.--
Phlebotomising of Governors, and Ministerial responsibility.--Border
Travels of the Shedma and Hhaha tribes.--How the Emperor enriches
himself by the quarrels of his subjects.--Message from the Emperor
respecting the Anti-Slavery Address.--Difficulties of travelling through
or residing in the Interior.--Use of Knives, and Forks, and Chairs are
signs of Social Progress.--Account of the periodic visit of the Mogador
Merchants to the Emperor in the Southern Capital.


I received several visits from the Moors. As a class of men, they are
far superior in civility and kindness to the Moorish population of
Tangier. So much for the foolish and absurd stories about the place,
which tell us that it is the only city of the Empire in which Christians
can live with safety and comparative comfort. These tales must have been
invented to please the Tangier diplomatists. The contrary is the fact,
for, whilst the Moors of Tangier consist of camel drivers and soldiers,
there are a good number of very respectable native merchants in Mogador;
nevertheless, a large portion of the population is in the pay of
government as militia, to keep in check the tribes of the neighbouring
provinces; but their pay is very small, and most of them do a little
business; many are artizuns and common labourers. As a specimen of their
ordinary conversation, take the following.

_Moors_.--"All the people of Morocco are soldiers; what can the
foreigner do against them? Morocco is one camp, our Sultan is one, we
have one Prophet, and one God."

_Traveller_.--"In our country we do not care to have so many soldiers.
We have fewer than France, and many other countries; but our soldiers do
not work like yours; they are always soldiers, and fight bravely."

_Moors_.--"We don't understand; how wonderful! the French must conquer
you with more soldiers."

_Traveller_.--"We have more ships, and our principal country is an
island; the sea surrounds us, and defends us."

_Moors_.--"How much pay has the Governor of Gibraltar?"

_Traveller_.--"About 20,000 dollars per annum."

_Moors_.--"Too much; why, the Koed of Mogador is obliged, instead of
receiving money, to send the Emperor, at a day's notice, 20, or 30,000
dollars! or if he does not pay, he is sent to prison at once; his head
is not the value of a slave's."

It appears that the old governor (who is now in Morocco) positively
refuses any salary or presents; his Excellency is a man of some small
property, and finds this plan answers best. He will not be fattened and
bled as the Emperor treats other governors. He politely hinted this to
the Emperor when he accepted office; since then, he has resolutely
refused all presents from the merchants, so that the Emperor has no
excuse whatever for bleeding him under the pretext that he is afflicted
with a plethora, from his exactions on the people. The moneys referred
to by the Moors are the custom dues, which are collected by a separate
department, and transmitted direct, to the Emperor.

Whilst residing at Mogador, Mr. Cohen arrived from Morocco, where he had
been with the merchants. He is the English Jew who assisted Mr. Davidson
in his travels through Morocco. His experience in Maroquine affairs is
considerable, and I shall offer his conclusions concerning the present
state of the Empire. I prefer, indeed, giving the opinion of various
residents or natives of the country to our own. Mr. Cohen's ideas will
be found to differ exceedingly from that of the (Imperial) merchants,
who, in point of fact, are not free men, and cannot be trustworthy
witnesses. As Mr. Elton justly observed, the Europeans are so much
involved with the Emperor, that they are almost obliged to consent
publicly to the violent death of the unfortunate Jew, Dorman, although
he was under the French protection, and likewise a kind of vice-consul.

Mr. Cohen says--"the people of Morocco are tired of their government,
tired of being pillaged of their property, tired of the insecurity and
uncertainty of their possessions; that is to say, of the few things
which still remain in their hands." Mr. Cohen goes so far as to
say--that, were a strong European power to be established on the coast,
the entire population would flock to its support. He gives the following
instance of the style and manner in which the Emperor bleeds the
governors of provinces.

A few years ago, a governor of Mogador presented himself to the Sultan
of Fez. He was received with all due honours. The governor then begged
leave to return to Morocco. He was dismissed with great demonstrations
of friendship. He arrived at Morocco, and the governor of that city
immediately informed him that he was his prisoner, the Sultan having a
claim against him, of 40,000 dollars. At length, the poor dupe of royal
favour obtained permission to go back to Mogador and to sell all he had,
in order to make up the sum of 40,000 dollars.

This is the way in which things are managed there. Of Maroquine policy,
Mr. Cohen says, "That when the Sultan finds himself in a scrape, he
gives way, though slightly dilatory at first. So long as he sees that he
does not commit himself, or is not detected, he does what he likes with
his own and other people's likewise, to the fullest extent of his power.
But on any mishap befalling him, Muley Abd Errahman, whenever he can,
always shifts the responsibility upon his ministers, and if one of them
gives his advice, and the course taken therein does not succeed, woe be
to the unhappy functionary!"

Some years ago, a number of troops rebelled against the Emperor. At the
instance of the prime minister, Ben Dris, they were pardoned; but,
instead of receiving gratefully this imperial mercy, the troops broke
out afresh in rebellion, which, with great difficulty, was quelled by
the Sultan. This, however, being accomplished, he called the prime
minister before him, and thus addressed the amazed vizier.

"Now, Sir, receive four hundred bastinadoes for your pains, and pay me
30,000 ducats; you will then take care in future how you give me
advice." Nevertheless, Ben Dris still remained vizier, and continued so
till his death. Bastinadoing a minister in Morocco is, however, much the
same as a forced resignation, or the dismissal of a minister in Europe.
Doubtless Ben Dris thought himself surprisingly lucky that the Emperor
did not cut off his head.

It was the late Mr. Hay's opinion, that Muley Abd Errahman was a good
man, but surrounded with bad advisers. The probability seems rather,
that he took all the credit of the good acts of his advisers, and flung
on them the odium of all the bad acts committed by himself, as many
other despotic sovereigns have often done before him.

With regard to the disaffection of the people, as alleged by Mr. Cohen,
its verification is of great importance to us, and our appreciation of
it equally so.

We might be counting upon the resistance of the Maroquines against an
invasion of the French, and find, to our astonishment, the invaders
received as deliverers from the exactions and tyrannies of the
Shereefian oppressor. The fact is, Morocco will never be able to resist
the progress of nations any more than China, especially since she has
got the most restless people in the world for her neighbours. Besides,
during the last thirty years, many of the Maroquines have visited
Europe, and their eyes are becoming opened, the film of Moorish
fanaticism has fallen off; even on their aggressive neighbours, they see
the exercise of a government less rapacious than their own, and more
security of life and property. Still, the Emperor will use every means
to build up a barrier against innovation.

Just at this time, a _rekos_ (courier) arrived from Mr. Willshire (now
at Morocco), bringing letters in answer to those which I had addressed
to him, touching my visit to the Emperor. He writes that he had "already
received orders from His Imperial Majesty respecting the object of my
mission," which words give me uneasiness, as they are evidently
unfavourable to it, and consequently to my journey to Morocco.

There is a misunderstanding between the provinces of Shed ma and Hhaha.
These districts adjoin Mogador, the city belonging to Hhaha. Shedma is
mostly lowland and plains, and Hhaha highlands and mountains, which form
a portion of the south-western Atlas, and strike down into the sea at
Santa Cruz. There seems to be no other reason for those frequent
obstinate hostilities on both sides, except the nature of the country.
It is lamentable to think, because "a narrow frith" divides two people,
or because one lives in the mountains and the other in the plains, that
therefore they should be enemies for ever! Strange infatuation of poor
human nature.

Here the feud legend babbles of revenge, and says that, in the time of
Muley Suleiman, one day when the Hhaha people were at prayers at
Mogador, during broad day light, the Shedma people came down upon them
and slaughtered them, and, whilst in the sacred and inviolable act of
devotion, entered the mosques and pillaged their houses. This produced
implacable hatred between them, which is likely to survive many
generations; but the story was told me by a Hhaha man, and not
improbably the people of Shedma had some plausible reason for making
this barbarous attack.

Even before this piece of treachery of one Mussulman towards another at
the hour of prayer, the feuds seemed to have existed. It is a remarkable
circumstance in the history of Islamism, that many of the most
treacherous and sanguinary actions of Mahometans have been committed
within the sacred enclosures of the mosques, and at the hour of prayer.
One of the caliphs having been assassinated in a mosque, seems to have
been the precedent for all the murders of the kind which have followed,
and indelibly disgrace the Mussulman annals.

These Hhaha and Shedma people are also borderers, and fight with the
accustomed ferocity of border tribes.

Their conflicts are very desultory, being carried on by twos and threes,
or sixes and sevens, and with sticks, and stones, and other weapons, if
they cannot get knives, or matchlocks. Meanwhile, the Emperor folds his
arms, and looks on superbly and serenely. When the two parties are
exhausted, or have had enough of it for the present; his Imperial
Highness then interferes, and punishes both by fine. Indeed, it pays him
better to pursue this course; for, instead of spending money in the
suppression of factious insurrections, he gains by mulcting both
parties. The Sultan, in fact, not only aggrandizes himself by the
quarrels of his own subjects, but he profits by the disputes between the
foreign consuls and his governors.

The imbroglio which took place some years since, between the Governor of
Mogador and the French Consul, M. Delaporte, is sufficiently
characteristic. An Algerine Mussulman, who was of course a French
subject, behaved himself very indecent, by setting all the usual rules
of Mahometan worship at defiance. This was a great scandal to the
Faithful. The Governor of Mogador, in defiance of religion, took upon
himself to punish a French Mussulman. The French Consul remonstrated
strongly in presence of the Governor, almost insulting him before his
people. The Sultan approved the conduct of his governor. The Consul
General decided that both parties ought to be removed, and the French
Government recalled their vice-consul. The Sultan, promised, but did not
dismiss his Governor, or rather the Governor himself would not be
dismissed. The French reiterated their complaints, which were supported
by a small squadron sent down to Mogador. The Governor was now
cashiered, and was besides obliged to pay the Emperor a fine of thirteen
thousand dollars, upon the pretext of appeasing the offended Majesty of
his royal master. So the Sultan always makes money by the misadventures
of his subjects. To indemnify the poor Governor for his fine, he
received soon after another appointment. On his return from Morocco,
having waited upon Mr Wiltshire regarding the presentation of the
Petition of the Anti-Slavery Society, the Vice-Consul explained the
great difficulty the Emperor had in receiving a petition which called
for an organic change in the social condition of the country, and that,
indeed, the abolition of slavery was "contrary to his religion." I then
represented to Mr. Willshire the propriety at least of waiting for the
arrival of the Governor of Mogador from Morocco, in order to have a
personal interview with him, to which the Vice-Consul acceded.

The difficulties of travelling through Morocco; and of residing in the
inland towns have been already mentioned.

In further proof, Mr. Elton related that, whilst the merchants visited
the Emperor in the, southern capital, a watch-maker, a European and a
Christian, asked permission of the Minister to dwell in the quarter of
the Moors, instead of that of the Jews, in which latter the Europeans
usually reside.

The Minister replied, "you may live there if you like, but you must have
ten soldiers to guard you." Such a reply from the Minister, and whilst
the merchants were protected by the presence of the Emperor himself, is
all conclusive as to the insecurity attached to Europeans in the
interior towns.

Morocco itself is a city of profound gloom, where the Moor indulges to
the utmost his taciturn disposition, and melancholy fatalism. It is,
therefore, not an enchanting abode for Europeans, who, whilst there
waiting on the Emperor, are obliged constantly to ride about to preserve
their health, or they would die of the suffocating stench in the Jew's
millah, or quarter. But, in taking this equestrian exercise, they are
not unfrequently insulted. An ungallant cavalier deliberately stopped
Mrs. Elton by riding up against her.

The lady spurred her horse and caught with her feet a portion of his
light burnouse, dragging it away. He was only prevented riding after and
cutting her down, by one of the Emperor's secretaries, who was passing
by at the time.

Mr. Elton had a fine black horse to ride upon. The populace were so
savage at seeing an infidel mounted upon so splendid an animal, that
they hooted: "Curse you, Infidel! dismount you dog!"

These instances shew the sauciness of the vulgar, and are a fair example
of the conduct of the Moors. I am told by Barbary Jews, it would be next
to impossible for a Christian to walk without disguise in broad daylight
at Fez. Not so much from the hostility of the populace, as from their
indecent and vehement curiosity. However, in these cases, I am obliged
to give the testimony of others. Mr. Cohen, when travelling through the
interior, assumes the character of a quack doctor, the best passport in
all these countries. Practising as he goes, he manages to get enough to
bear his charges on the way.

Oliver Goldsmith piped, but in Morocco the traveller and stranger
physics his way. To Europeans, Mr. Cohen gives this advice--"Never to
stay more than one night at any place." "Mr. Davidson," he says,
"stopped so long at Wadnoun, that all the Desert, as far as Timbuctoo,
heard of his projects and travels, and were determined to waylay and
plunder him."

But, on the contrary, with respect to my own experience in the Desert,
the people appeared equally hostile or offended at my taking them by
surprise. Desert travelling after all is mostly an affair of luck. Six
travellers might be sent to Timbuctoo and three return, and three be
murdered, and yet the three who were murdered might have been as prudent
and as skilful as the three who were successful. The Maroquine
Government often shew a perfect Chinese jealousy of Europeans travelling
in the interior. When Doctor Willshire, brother of the Consul, returned
from Morocco, the Government gave orders that "he should be taken
directly to Mogador, and not be allowed to turn to the right hand or to
the left, to collect old stones or herbs." This lynx-eyed government
imagined they saw in Doctor Willshire's botanical and mineralogical
rambles, a design of spying out the powers and resources of the country.

The consentaneous progress of Morocco in the universal movement of the
age, is argued by the merchants from an increased use of chairs, and
knives and forks. Some years ago, scarcely a knife and fork, or a chair
was to be found in this part of Morocco. Now, almost every house in the
Jewish quarter has them. The Jew of Barbary can use them with less
scruple than the orthodox Tory Moor, who sets his face like flint
against all changes, because his European brethren adopt them. Many
innovations of this domestic sort are introduced from Europe into North
Africa through the instrumentality of native Jews. Tea has become an
article Of universal consumption. It is, indeed, the wine of the
Maroquine Mussulmen. [20] Even in remote provinces, amongst Bebers and
Bedouins, the most miserable looking and living of people the finest
green tea is to be found.

You enter a miserable looking hut, when you are amazed by the hostess
unlocking an old box, and taking out a choice tea service, cups,
saucers, tea-pot, and tea-tray, often of white china with gilt edges.
These, after use, are always kept locked up, as objects of most precious
value. The sugar is put in the tea-pot, and the Moors and Jews usually
drink their tea so sweet that it may be called syrup. But if any lady
tries the plan of melting the sugar while the tea is brewing in the
tea-pot, she will find the tea so prepared has acquired a different, and
not disagreeable flavour.

Morocco has its fashions and manias as well as Europe. House building is
now the rage. They say it is not so easy for the Sultan to fleece the
people of their property when it consists of houses. Almost every
distinguished Moor in the interior has built, or is building himself a
spacious house. This mania is happily a useful one, and must advance the
comfort and sanitary improvement of the people. It is as good as a
Health of Towns Bill for them.

The merchants having all returned from Morocco, I shall give some
account of their visit to the Emperor. The ancient rule of imperial
residence was, that the Sultan should sojourn six months in Fez, and six
months in Morocco, the former the northern, and the latter the southern
capital. This is not adhered to strictly, the Emperor taking up his
abode at one capital or the other, and sometimes at Micknos, according
to his caprice. He never fails, however, to visit Morocco once a year,
on account of its neighbourhood to Mogador, his much loved, and
beautiful commercial city. The Emperor himself, before his accession to
the throne, was the administrator of the customhouse of this city, where
he has acquired his commercial tastes and habits of business, which he
has cultivated from the very commencement of his reign. When the Emperor
resides in the South, he receives visits from the merchants of Mogador.
These visits are imperative on the merchants, if they are his imperial
debtors, or even if they wish to maintain a friendly feeling with his
government. Upon an average, the visits or deputations of merchants,
take place every three or four years; more frequently they cannot well
be, because they cost the merchants immense sums in presents, each often
giving to the value of three or four thousand dollars. In return, they
receive additional and prolonged credits.

The number of Imperial merchants is about twenty, three of whom are
Englishmen, Messrs. Willshire, Elton, and Robertson. Most of the rest
are Barbary Jews. [21]

There is a Belgian merchant who did not go with these. This gentleman,
owing nothing to the Emperor, preferred to pay duty on shipping his
merchandize, on which by payment of ready money, he gets 25 per cent
discount. This plan, however, does not enable him to compete with the
Imperial merchants, whose duties accumulate till they are years and
years in arrear. And when these arrears have gone on increasing till
there is no chance of payment, the Emperor, in order to keep up his
firms of enslaved merchants, will rather remit half or more of the debt,
in consideration of a handsome present, than encourage merchants to make
ready money payments. The largest debt owing by a single firm, is that
of a native Jew, viz., 250,000 dollars. The amount of the debt of the
united Mogador merchants is more than one million and a half of dollars.
The usual course of the merchants is to pay the debt off by monthly
instalments.

As an instance of the Emperor's straining a point to keep solvent one of
his mercantile firms, on the occasion of the visit of the merchants to
Morocco, his Imperial Highness lent the house of Hasan Joseph (Jews)
10,000 dollars in hard cash, which, to my knowledge, were paid to them
out of the coffers of the Mogador custom-house. This was certainly an
instance of magnanimous generosity on the part of Muley Abd Errahman.
But the Emperor's genius is mercantile, and he is determined to support
his Imperial traders; and his conduct, after all, is only the
calculation of a raiser.

It must be mentioned, however, to the honour of Mr. Elton, that on the
bombardment of Mogador, he and his lady were allowed to leave at once,
having paid up all their government debt. Indeed, the governor of that
place, was always accustomed to say to the collector of the returns of
the monthly payment of instalments: "Now, go first to Mrs. Elton; she
will be sure to have the money ready for you. And we must have money
to-day from some of the merchants." On another occasion, his Excellency
called the lady of Mr. Elton, "the best man amongst the merchants." Mrs.
Elton, being a vivacious, energetic lady, was often called "the woman of
the Christians."

The following are the stations at which the merchants stop from Mogador
to Morocco, to visit the Emperor.

1st. Emperor's Gardens; five hours from Mcgador, where are some fine fig
trees, and a spring.

2nd. Ain Omas.

3rd. Seeshouar.

4th. Wad Enfes.

The country, for the first two days, is beautifully rural, scattered
over with noble Argan forests, on the third and fourth days, the journey
is through plains and an open country. On the second day, after leaving
Mogador, you obtain a distinct view of the great Atlas range at the back
of Morocco; on the fifth, as you approach the capital, the country is
overspread with wild date-palms, palmettos, or dwarf palms. The view of

  "Towering Atlas that supports the sky,"

now stands forth, vaster and more magnificent as you approach the
capital, and is the only feature of surpassing interest on the journey;
but it suffices to absorb all the attention of the traveller. As he
gazes on the giant mountain, which seems to support with its huge rocky
arms the frame-work of the skies, its head covered with everlasting
snow, he forgets the fatigue of his painful route under an African sun;
and, lost in pious musings, adores the Omnipotent being who laid the
foundation of this solid buttress.

Halfway is called "the Neck of the Camel," where there is a well in the
midst of a scene extremely desert and dreary. Here all the donkeys of
the party of merchants died from want of water. The water of this well
is not permitted to be drunk by animals, in obedience to the solemn
Testament of the Saint who dug it. The poor horses and mules were tied
close up to the well, looking wistfully at the water when drawn for the
biped animals, and snuffing the scent; but they were not allowed to
taste a drop. Two horses broke loose and fought, their combat being
aggravated by thirst, "See!" cried the Moors to the merchants, "the
Saint is angry with you for having wished to give his water to horses."

Our merchants, however, in defiance of the Saint (this invisible enemy
of the lower creation) and of his supporters, got a supply of water,
which during the night, and en marche the next day, they distributed to
their steeds. The accommodation on the way, and at the capital is very
bad, even the waiting-room near the palace, appropriated to the
Christians, is but an old dilapidated shed, with one of its sides
knocked out, or never filled in. "Everything," say our merchants, "is
going to rack and ruin in the capital. The Emperor will not even repair
his palaces, or the jealousies in which he keeps his women; money is his
only pursuit and his God."

Their residence in the capital was very disagreeable, all being cooped
up in the Jews' quarter, and obliged to subsist on victuals cooked by
these people, which made certain of them unwell, for some of the Barbary
Jew's food is very indigestible.

The presentation of the merchants to the Emperor was conducted as
follows: At nine in the morning, they were admitted into a garden in
presence of about two thousand imperial guards, all drawn up in file,
looking extremely fierce. Passing these bearded warriors, they were
conducted into a large square lined with buildings, where, after waiting
about five minutes, the gate of the palace was suddenly thrown open, and
the Emperor rode out superbly mounted on a white horse, followed on foot
by a group of courtiers. His Imperial Highness was attended by the
Governor of Mogador, who walked by his side.

The first persons presented to the Shereefian lord were the officials of
Mogador, who were introduced by the Governor of that city; afterwards
came some Moorish grandees; then the Christians were presented, and
finally the Jewish merchants. The latter were introduced by the Governor
of Mogador, the Jews taking off their shoes as they passed before the
Emperor. One passed at a time, with his cadeau behind him, carried by an
attendant Jew. As the merchants moved on, his Imperial Highness asked
their names, and condescended to thank each of them separately for his
offering.

The merchants carried in their hand, an invoice of their respective
presents, and gave it to the Governor, for the articles on their
delivery are not exposed before the eyes of the Sultan. To open the
budget would be a breach of good breeding, and would shock the Imperial
modesty.

Fifteen merchants were introduced, and the ceremony of presentation
lasted about twenty minutes; this being concluded, the merchants were
permitted to perambulate the gardens of the Emperor, and to pluck a
little fruit. They were afterwards delayed a fortnight, waiting to
present a _cadeau_ to the Emperor's eldest son. Such are the details of
this journey, which I got from the merchants themselves. Mr. Willshire,
being a consul and great customer of his Imperial Highness, also
received a gift of a horse in exchange. The united value of the presents
to the Emperor, on this occasion, was fifty thousand dollars, which
amply indemnifies him for his money-lending, and the credit that he
gives. They consisted principally of articles of European manufactures.
His Imperial Highness afterwards sells them to his subjects on his own
account. Of course, amongst this mass of presents, there are many nice
things such as tea, sugar, spices, essences &c., for his personal
comfort and luxury, as well as for his harem, besides articles of dress
and ornament.

It will not be out of place here, to give a brief account of the
commerce of Morocco. In doing so, we must take into consideration the
prodigious quantity of imports and exports, of which there are no
statistics in the Imperial custom-houses, and no consular returns. Let
us estimate the population of Morocco at its general compensation of
eight millions, and suppose that each spends a dollar per annum in the
purchase of European manufactures. This will raise the value of imports
at once to eight millions of dollars per annum. It is notorious that the
contraband trade of Tangier, and Tetuan, and the northern coast
generally doubles or trebles the commerce that passes through the
customhouse; but the legal trade is not well ascertained.

Mr. Hay once sent, I believe, to the Agent of Mogador, a list of
questions to be answered by the consular department. The gentleman, who
was an unsalaried vice-consul, appalled at the number of
interrogatories, immediately replied, "That he had his own business to
attend to; he could not sit down to compose consular returns, which
would require weeks of labour; and if it were considered part of his
duties to answer such questions, he begged to resign at once his
vice-consulship."

As to the Barbary Jews, who have charge of some of the vice-consulates,
they are necessarily incapacitated, by reason of their want of
education, for such an employment. It is, therefore, hopeless to attempt
to give any accurate account of the commerce of Morocco, I can only
annex a few details of those things of which we are actually cognizant.

Whatever may be said of the indolent habits of the Moors, they were
once, and still are, a commercial people. Spain, the neighbour of
Morocco, still feels the loss of the Moors. They were the really
industrious classes settled in Spain. The merchants, the artists, the
operatives, and agriculturists unfortunately have left behind them few
inheriting their habits of perseverance. Little, indeed, can be expected
in Spain, where the maxim is adopted, that "nobility may lie dormant in
a servant, but becomes extinct in a merchant." Spain lost upwards of
three millions of intelligent and industrious Moors, a shock she will
never recover.

The bombardment of a commercial city of this country would not do the
injury which is commonly imagined. The ports are numerous though not
very good. A single house or shed on the beach of Mogador, or Tangier,
is a sufficient custom-house for the Moors. There are no great deposits
of goods on the coast, for as soon as the camels bring their loads of
exports, these are shipped, and the camels immediately return to the
interior, laden with imported goods or manufactures.

Mogador is the great commercial depot of the Atlantic coast, and
therefore "the beautiful Ishweira, the beloved town," of Muley Abd
Errahman. Its trade is principally, however, with the south, the
provinces of Sous and Wadnoun, and the Western Sahara. Mogador is also
the bona-fide port of the southern capital of Morocco. Two-thirds of the
commerce of Mogador is carried on with England, the rest is divided
among the other nations of Europe; but of this third, I should think
France has one half. The port of Mogador has usually some half-a-dozen
vessels lying in it, but from twenty to thirty have been seen there.
They are usually sixty days discharging and taking in cargo. Each vessel
pays forty dollars port-dues, which must press very heavily upon small
vessels, but it is seldom that a vessel of less than one hundred tons is
seen at Mogador. The grand staple exports are only two, gum and almonds;
upon the sale of these, the commercial activity of this city entirely
depends. English vessels come directly from London, the French from
Marseilles; but so badly is this commerce managed that, at the present
time, Morocco produce is higher in Mogador than it is in London or
Marseilles; for instance, Morocco almonds are cheaper in London than
Mogador.

Mazagan, and some few other ports, export produce direct to Europe, but
Tangier is the next commercial port of the empire. There is an important
trade in manufactures and provisions carried on between Tangier and
Gibraltar. The Fez merchants have resident agents in Gibraltar. Curious
stories are told of Maroquine adventurers leaving Tangier and Fez as
camel-drivers and town-porters, and then assuming the character and
style of merchants in Gibraltar, throwing over their shoulders a
splendid woollen burnouse, and folding round their heads a thoroughly
orthodox turban in large swelling folds of milk-white purity.

In this way, they will walk through the stores of Gibraltar, and obtain
thousands of dollars' worth of credit. The merchant-emperor found it
necessary to put a stop to this, and promulgated a decree to the effect,
that "he would not, for the future, be responsible for the debts of any
of his subjects contracted out of his dominions."

This was aimed at these trading adventurers, and the decree was
transmitted to the British Consul, who had it published in the Gibraltar
Gazette while I was staying in that city. Up to this time, the Emperor,
singularly enough, had made himself responsible for all the debts of his
subjects trading with Gibraltar.

The trade in provisions at Tangier is most active, bullocks, sheep,
butcher's meat, fowls, eggs, game and pigeons, grain and flour, &c., are
daily shipped from Tangier to Gibraltar. The garrison and population of
Gibraltar draw more than two-thirds of their provisions from this and
other northern parts of Morocco.

This government speculates in and carries on commerce; and, like most
African and Asiatic governments, has had its established monopolies from
time immemorial, of some of which it disposes, whilst it reserves others
for itself, as those of tobacco, sulphur, and cochineal. All the high
functionaries engage in commerce, and this occupation of trade and
barter is considered the most honourable in the empire, sanctioned as it
is by the Emperor himself, who may be considered as the chief of
merchants. The monopolies are sold by public auction at so much per
annum. On its own monopolies, government, as a rule, exacts a profit of
cent per cent.

The following is a list of the monopolies which the Emperor sells,
either to his own employers or to native and foreign merchants.

1. Leeches.--This is one of the most recently established monopolies,
dating only about twenty years back. The trade in leeches was set on
foot by Mr. Frenerry; it brought, at first, but a few dollars per annum,
and now the monopoly is sold for 50,000. Leeches are principally found
in the lakes of the north-west districts, called the Gharb.

2. Wax.--This monopoly is confined almost exclusively to the markets of
Tangier and El-Araish. It sold, while I was in the country, for three
thousand dollars.

3. Bark.--This is a monopoly of the north, principally of the
mountainous region of Rif. It is farmed for about sixteen thousand
dollars.

4. The coining of copper money.--The right of coining money in the name
of the Emperor, is sold for ten thousand dollars to each principal city.
It is a dangerous privilege to be exercised; for, should the alloy be
not of a quality which pleases the Emperor, or the particular governor
of the city, the unfortunate coiner is forthwith degraded, and his
property confiscated. Indeed, the coiner sometimes pays for his
negligence, or dishonesty, with his head.

5. Millet, and other small seeds.--This monopoly at Tangier is sold for
five hundred dollars. The price varies in other places according to
circumstances.

6. Cattle.--The cattle exported from Tetuan, Tangier, and El-Araish, for
the victualling of Gibraltar, is likewise a monopoly; it amounted during
my stay to 7,500 dollars. In consequence of an alleged treaty, but which
does not exist on paper, the Emperor of Morocco has bound himself to
supply our garrison of Gibraltar with 2,000 head of cattle per annum,
1,500 of which must be shipped from Tangier, the rest from other parts
of the Gharb, or north-west. British contractors pay five dollars per
head export duty, the ordinary tax is ten. It is estimated, however,
that some three or four thousand head of cattle are annually exported
from Morocco for our garrison. The Gibraltar Commissariat contractors
complain, and with reason, that the Maroquine monopolist supplies the
British Government with "the very worst cattle of all Western Barbary."

These monopolies do not interfere with the custom-house, which levies
its duties irrespectively of them. Leeches pay an export duty of 2s. 9d.
the thousand; wax pays an _ad valorem_ duty of fifty per cent; bark pays
a very small duty, and millet scarcely a penny per quintal.

Independently of these monopolies, there are exports of merchandise of a
special character, and requiring a special permission from the Sultan,
such as grains and beasts of burden; and, if we may be permitted,
bipeds, or Jews and Jewesses.

His Imperial Highness has absolute need of Jews to carry on the commerce
of the country. No male adult Jew, or child, can leave the ports of
Morocco, without paying four dollars customs duty. A Jewess must pay a
hundred dollars. The reason of there being such an excessive export-duty
on women is to keep them in the country, as a sort of pledge for the
return of their husbands, brothers or fathers, in the event of their
leaving for commercial or other purposes. Slaves are not exported from
Morocco. Besides the payment of special impost on exportation, wool pays
a duty of three dollars per quintal, and two pounds of powder when
dirty, and double when washed. A bullock pays export duty ten dollars,
and a sheep one. Sheepskins eight dollars the hundred, bullock-skins
three dollars per quintal, and goat-skins the same. Of grain, wheat pays
an export duty of three-fourths of a dollar per fanega, or about a
quintal. Barley is not exported, there being scarcely enough for home
consumption.

Horses are exported in small numbers, by special permission from the
Emperor, A few years since when Spain threatened the frontier of
Portugal, the English Government found it necessary to come to the aid of
the latter country, and Mr. Frenerry was commissioned by our Government
to purchase of the Emperor five hundred horses for Portugal.

His Imperial Highness called together his governors of cities, and
shieks of provinces, and after a long debate, it was unanimously decided
that so large a number of horses could not be sold to the Christians
without danger to the empire, whilst also, the transaction would be
contrary to the principles of Islamism.

Should an individual wish to export a single horse, he would have to pay
sixty dollars, a duty which entirely amounts to a prohibition, many of
the boasted beasts not being worth twenty dollars. A mule pays forty,
and an ass five dollars. Mules are much dearer in Morocco and in other
parts of Barbary than horses. Camels are rarely exported, and have no
fixed import.

The Queen of Spain, some time ago, solicited the Sultan for four camels,
and his Imperial Highness had the gallantry to grant the export free of
duty.

There are several exports which are not monopolies. These are
principally from the south. The following are some of them.

Ostrich feathers.--These are of three qualities; the first of which pays
three dollars per pound, the second quality one and a half dollars, and
the third, three-quarters of a dollar. Many feather merchants are now in
Mogador visiting at the feasts of the Jews, who reside in Sous and
Wadnoun, and have communications with all the districts of the Sahara.

Elephants' teeth.--Ivory pays an export duty of ten per cent. During
late years, both ivory and ostrich feathers have lost much of their
value as articles of commerce.

Gums.--Gum-arabic pays two dollars per quintal export duty, and gum
sudanic an ad valorem duty of ten per cent. But now-a-days only the very
best gum will sell in English markets; the inferior qualities, as of all
other Barbary produce, are shipped to Marseilles. One looks with extreme
interest at the beautiful pellucid drops of Sudanic gum, knowing that
the Arabs bring some of it from the neighbourhood of Timbuctoo.

Almonds.--Both the sweet and the bitter, in the shell, or the oil of
almonds, pay three dollars per quintal. Ship-loads at once are exported
from Mogador direct for Soudan.

Red woollen sashes are exported at five dollars per dozen. The Spaniards
take a great quantity. Tanned skins, especially the red, or Morocco, are
exported at ten per cent, _ad valorem_. Slippers pay a dollar the
hundred. The haik or barracan is exported in great numbers to the Levant
by the pilgrims. The vessels, also, that carry pilgrims from Morocco,
return laden with these and other native manufactures. Barbary dried
peas are exported principally to Spain, paying a dollar the quintal. Fez
flour pays one dollar and a half per fanega; dates pay five dollars the
quintal; fowls and eggs, the former two dollars per dozen, the latter
two dollars per thousand; oranges and lemons pay a dollar the thousand.

Gold is brought from Soudan over the Desert, and is sometimes exported.
I have no account of it, and never heard it mentioned in Morocco as an
article of any importance.

Olive-oil is exported from the north, but not in great quantities. The
amount exported in a recent year was about the value of L6,000 sterling.
The olive is not so much cultivated in Morocco as in Tunis and Tripoli.

Besides the articles above mentioned, antimony, euphorbium, horns, hemp,
linseed, rice, maize, and dra, orchella weed, orris-root, pomegranate
peel, sarsaparilla, snuff, sponges, walnuts, garbanyos, gasoul, and
mineral soap, gingelane, and commin seeds, &c., are exported in various
quantities. [22]

It was reported in the mercantile circles, that representations would be
made to the Emperor to place the trade of the country upon a regular,
and more stable footing. All nations, indeed, would benefit by a change
which could not but be for the better. But I question whether his
Imperial Highness will give up his old and darling system of being the
sovereign-merchant of the Empire. It is not the interest of Great
Britain to annoy him, for we have always to look at Gibraltar. But it
would be desirable if Christian merchants could be found to undertake
the duty, to have all the vice-consuls of the coast Christians, in
preference to Jews. By having Jewish consuls, we place ourselves in a
false position with the Emperor, who is obliged to submit to the
prejudices of his people against Hebrews. British merchants ought to be
allowed to visit their own vessels whilst in port, to superintend, or
what not, the stowing or landing of their goods, as they are entitled to
do by treaty. Spanish dollars are the chief currency in Morocco; but
there are also doubloons and smaller gold coins. This currency, the
merchants manage very badly. A doubloon loses sixteen pence, or four
Maroquine ounces in exchange at Mogador, whilst at the capital of
Morocco, three days' journey from this, it passes for the same value it
bears in Spain and Gibraltar.

As to the revenues of the Government of Morocco, our means of
information are still more uncertain and conjectural, than those we
possess regarding commerce. A French writer asserts, that the tithes
upon land assigned by the Koran and the capitation tax on the Jews,
produce from twenty to thirty million francs (or say about one million
pounds sterling) per annum. This, perhaps, is too large a sum.

About a century ago, the revenues of Moocco were estimated at only
L200,000 sterling per annum. But if Muley Abd Errahman has fifty
millions of dollars, or ten millions sterling in the vaults of Mequinez,
he may be considered as the richest monarch in Africa, nay in all
Europe. It is positively stated that Muley Ismail left this amount, or
one hundred millions of ducats in the imperial treasury, which Sidi
Mahommed reduced to two millions. It may have been the great object of
the life of the present Sultan to restore this enormous hoard. No
country is rich or safe without a vast capital in hand as a reserve for
times of trouble, war, or famine. But it is not necessary that such
reserve should be in the hands of a government.

This, a Maroquine prince cannot comprehend, and he decides as to the
riches and poverty of his country by the amount he possesses in his
royal vaults.

In treating of trade, and comparing its exports with the peculiar
products and manufactures of the cities and towns, hereafter to be
enumerated, we may approximate to an idea of the resources of the
Maroquine Empire, but everything is more or less deteriorated in this
naturally rich country.

Cattle and sheep, grain and fruits, are of inferior quality, owing to
the want of proper culture. No spontaneous growth is equal to culture,
for such is the ordinance of Divine Providence. Half of this country is
desert. The iron hand of despotic government presses heavily upon all
industry. If we add to this defective state of culture, the miserably
moral condition of the people, we have the unpleasant picture of an
inferiority civilized race of mankind scattered over a badly cultivated
region. Not all the magnificence of the glorious Atlas can reconcile
such a prospect to the imagination. But, unhappily, Morocco does not
constitute a very striking exception to the progress of civilization
along the shores and in the isles of the Mediterranean. Many countries
in Southern Europe are in a state little superior, and the Moorish
civilization is almost on a par with that of the Grecian, Sicilian, or
Maltese, and quite equal to Turkish advancement in the arts and sciences
of the nineteenth century. The only real advantage of the Turks over the
Moors consists in the improvements the former have made in the
organization of the army. Whoever travels through Morocco, and will but
open his eyes to survey its rich valleys and fertile plains, will be
impressed with the conviction that this country, cultivated by an
industrious population, and fostered by a paternal government, is
capable of producing all the agricultural wealth of the north and the
south of Europe, as well as the Tropics, and of maintaining its
inhabitants in happiness and plenty.




CHAPTER VI.

Influence of French Consuls.--Arrival of the Governor of Mogador from
the Capital; he brings an order to imprison the late Governor; his
character, and mode of administering affairs.--Statue of a Negress at
the bottom of a well.--Spanish Renegades.--Various Wedding Festivals of
Jews.--Frequent Fetes and Feastings amongst the Jewish population of
Morocco.--Scripture Illustration, "Behold the Bridegroom
cometh!"--Jewish Renegades.--How far women have souls.--Infrequency of
Suicides.


Notwithstanding the sarcasm of a French journalist that the French and
other Europeans consuls are "consuls des jusifs, et pour la protection
des jusifs," the French consuls both here and at Tangier, have real
power and influence with the Government.

The Governor of Mogador, Sidi Haj El-Arby, arrived from Morocco. His
Excellency feared an attack from the Shedma and the Hhaha people, and
was obliged to have a strong escort. Not long ago, the Sultan himself
had a narrow escape from falling into the hands of a band of insurgents;
their object was to make their lord-paramount a prisoner, and extort
concessions as the price of his liberty. This will help us to form an
opinion of the want of sympathy between potentate and subjects in
Morocco.

His Excellency brought an order from the Imperial despot to imprison the
late governor, if the balance of 6,000 dollars was not instantly
forthcoming, he having only paid nine out of the 15,000 demanded. The
late governor was confined in his house, instead of in the common
prison. It was said he was worth 30,000 dollars, but that he was afraid
to make too prompt a payment of the demand of the Emperor, lest he
should be called upon for more. However, his furniture, horses, and
mules were sold in the public streets; a melancholy spectacle was the
degradation of a former governor of this city. [23]

The Moors look upon these things as matters of course, or with
indifference, quietly ejaculating, "It is destiny! who can resist?" but
the Moor, nevertheless, can clearly discern that wealth is a crime in
the eyes of their sovereign. I am not surprised at the present governor
absolutely rejecting all presents, and making the people call him by the
_soubriquet_ of "the Governor of _no_ presents,"

A short time after his appointment, a merchant having left his
Excellency a present during his absence from home, was immediately
summoned before him, when the following dialogue ensued:--

_His Excellency._--"Sir, how dare you leave a present at my house?"

_The Merchant._--"Other governors before your Excellency have received
presents."

_His Excellency._--"I am a governor of no presents! How much do you owe
the Sultan, my master?"

_The Merchant._--"I--I--I--don't know," (hesitating and trembling)

_His Excellency._--"Very well, when you owe the Sultan nothing, bring me
a present, and take this away, and make known to everybody, that Haj
El-Arby receives _no_ presents."

The fact is, the Governor knows what he is about. Were his Excellency to
receive 16,000 dollars per annum as presents from the merchants of
Mogador, the Sultan would demand of him 15,999; besides, there is not a
merchant who makes a present that does not demand its value, a _quid pro
quo_ in the remission of custom-duties. Sidi-El-Arby is also a thorough
diplomatist, so far as report goes; he promises anybody anything; he
keeps all on the tiptoe of most blessed expectation, and so makes
friends of everybody. "To his friend, Cohen," he says, "I'll take you
back to my country with me, and make you rich; we are of the same
country." To Phillips, "You shall have a ship of your own soon." To the
merchants, "The Sultan shall lend you money whenever you want it." To
the Moors in general, "You shall have your taxes reduced." In this way,
his Excellency promises and flatters all, but takes very good care to
compromise himself with none.

The frequented as well as the unfrequented spots are centres of
superstition. In the Sahara, by a lonely well, in the midst of boundless
sterility, where the curse on earth seems to have burnt blackest, a
camel passes every night groaning piteously, and wandering about in
search of its murdered master, so the tale was told me. Now, about two
day's journey from Mogador, there is also a well, containing within its
dank and dark hollow a perpetual apparition. At its bottom is seen the
motionless statue of a negress, with a variety of wearing materials
placed beside her, all made of fine burnished gold, and so bright, that
the dreary cavern of the deep well is illuminated. Whoever presumes to
look down the well at her, and covets her shining property, is
instantaneously seized with thirst and fever; and, if he does not expire
at once, he never recovers from the fatal effects of his combined
curiosity and avarice. People draw water daily from this well, but no
one dare look down it.

Truth may be in this well! since there is a sad want of it on this, as
on other parts of the world.

I was introduced to a Spanish renegade, a great many make their escape
from the presidios of the North. On getting away from these convict
establishments, they adopt the Mahometan religion, are pretty well
received by the Maroquines, and generally pass the rest of their days
tranquilly among the Moors. I imagine the better sort of them remain
Christians at heart, notwithstanding their public assumption of
Islamism. This renegade was a stonemason, whom I found at work, and he
was not at all distinguishable by strangers from the Moors, being
dressed precisely in the same fashion. I had some conversation with him,
which was characteristic of conceit, feeling and honour.

_Traveller_--"How long have you escaped?"

_Renegade._--"More than twenty years."

_Traveller._--"Do you like this country and the Moors?"

_Renegade._--"Better is Marruecos than Spain."

_Traveller._--"Shall you ever attempt to return to Spain?"

_Renegade._--"Why? here I have all I want. Besides, they would stretch
my neck for sending a fellow out of the world without his previously
having had an interview with his confessor."

_Traveller._--"Are you not conscience-stricken? having committed such a
crime, how can you mention it?"

_Renegade._--"Pooh, conscience! pooh, corazor!"

Many of those wretched men have indeed lost their corazor, or it is
seared with a red-hot iron.

Some hundreds of these Spanish convicts are scattered over the country,
but they soon lose their nationality. It is probable that, from some
knowledge of them, the Emperor presumed lately to call the Spaniards
"the vilest of nations," and yet at various times, the Maroquines have
shown great sympathy for the Spaniards. Some of these renegades were
found at the Battle of Isly in charge of field-pieces, where, according
to the French reports, they displayed great devotion to the cause of the
Emperor.

When the governors of the convict settlements find too many on his
hands, or the prisons too full, they let a number of their best
conducted escape to the interior. The presence of those cut-throats in
Morocco may have something to do with such broils as the following, of
which I was a witness. Two fellows quarrelled violently, and were on the
point of sticking one another with their knives, when up stepped a third
party and cried out, "What! do you intend to act like Christians and
kill one another?" At the talismanic word of Eusara ("Christians, or
Nazareens,") they instantly desisted and became friends. The term
"Christian or Nazareen," is one of the most oppobrious names with which
the people of Mogador can abuse one another.

The weddings and attendant feasts of the Jews are the more remarkable,
when we consider the circumstance of the social state of this oppressed
race in Morocco, their precarious condition, and the numberless insults
and oppressions inflicted on them by both the government and the people;
I was present at several of these weddings, and shall give the readers a
glimpse of them. I had read and heard a great deal about the persecution
of the Jews in Morocco, and was, therefore, not a little surprised to
meet with these continual feasts and festivals among a people so much
talked about as victims of Mussulman oppression.

I find two sentences in my notes containing the pith of the whole. "The
Jews continued their feasts; about a third of their time is spent in
feasting." Again--"Amidst all their degradation, the Jew we saw to-day
recreating themselves to the utmost extent of their capacities of
enjoyment." It appears that during the time I was at Mogador there was
an unusual number of weddings, and then followed the feast of the
Passover. I think, whilst I was at Tangier, weddings or celebration of
weddings were going on every night. It may be safely asserted, that no
people in Barbary enjoy themselves more than the Jews, or more pamper
and gratify their appetites. What with weddings, feasts, and obligatory
festivals, their existence is one round of eating and drinking. These
feasts, besides, do not take place in a corner, nor are they barricaded
from public, or envious, or inquisitorial view, but are open to all,
being attended by Christians, Moors and Arabs.

These wedding-feasts are substantial things. Here is the entry in my
journal of an account of them: "A bullock was killed at the house of the
bridegroom, tea and cakes and spirits were freely, nay universally
distributed there. The company afterwards went off with the bridegroom
to the house of the bride, where another distribution of the same kind
took place, whilst half of the bullock was brought for the bride's
friends. Here the bridegroom, in true oriental style, mounted upon a
couch of damask and gold. The bride, laden with bridal ornaments of gold
and jewels, and covered with a gauze veil, was led out by the women and
placed by his side. She was then left alone to sit in state as queen of
the feast, whilst the company regaled themselves with every imaginable
luxury of eating and drinking. Her future husband now produced, as a
present for his bride, a splendid pair of jewelled ear-rings, which were
held up amidst the screaming approbation of the guests. The Jewesses
present, were weighed down under the dead weight of a profusion of
jewels and gold, tiaras of pearls, necklaces of coral and gems, armlets,
wristlets and legets of silver gold and jet, with gold and silver
braided gowns, skirts and petticoats.

This fiesta was kept up for seven days. Astonished at the profusion of
jewels worn by the various guests, I received a solution by a question I
asked, touching this mavellous circumstance. The greater part of the
jewels, worn on these occasions, are borrowed from friends and
neighbours; they must belong to some of the Jewish families, and their
quantity shews the great wealth possessed by the Jews living under this
despotic government,

I assisted at the celebration of the nuptials of a portion of the family
of the feather merchants, a rich and powerful firm established in the
south for the purchase of ostrich-feathers.

This was a wedding of great _eclat_; all the native Jewish aristocracy
of Mogador being invited to it. The festivities, beginning at noon, I
first entered the apartment where the bride was sitting in state. She
was elevated on a radiant throne of gold and crimson cushions amidst a
group of women, her hired flatterers, who kept singing and bawling out
her praises. "As beautiful as the moon is Rachel!" said one. "Fairer
than the jessamine!" exclaimed another. "Sweeter than honey in the
honey-comb!" ejaculated a third. Her eyes were shut, it being deemed
immodest to look on the company, and the features of her face motionless
as death, which made her look like a painted corpse.

To describe the dresses of the bride would be tedious, as she was
carried away every hour and redressed, going through and exhibiting to
public view, with the greatest patience, the whole of her bridal
wardrobe. Her face was artistically painted; cheeks vermillion; lips
browned, with an odoriferous composition; eye-lashes blackened with
antimony; and on the forehead and tips of the chin little blue stars.
The palms of the hands and nails were stained with henna, or brown-red,
and her feet were naked, with the toe-nails and soles henna-stained. She
was very young, perhaps not more than thirteen, and hugely corpulent,
having been fed on paste and oil these last six months for the occasion.
The bridegroom, on the contrary, was a man of three times her age, tall,
lank and bony, very thin, and of sinister aspect. The woman was a little
lump of fat and flesh, apparently without intelligence, whilst the man
was a Barbary type of Dickens' Fagan.

The ladies had now arranged themselves in tiers, one above the other,
and most gorgeous was the sight. Most of them wore tiaras, all flaming
with gems and jewels. They were literally covered from head to foot with
gold and precious stones. As each lady has but ten fingers, it was
necessary to tie some scores of rings on their hair. The beauty of the
female form, in these women, was quite destroyed by this excessive
quantity of jewellery. These jewels were chiefly pearls, brilliants,
rubies and emeralds.

They are amassed and descend as heir-looms in families, from mother to
daughter. Some of the jewels being very ancient, they constitute the
riches of many families. In reverses of fortune, they are pledged, or
turned into money to relieve immediate necessity. The upper tiers of
ladies were the youngest, and least adorned, and consequently the
prettiest. The ancient dowagers sat below as so many queens enthroned,
challenging scrutiny and admiration. They were mostly of enormous
corpulency, spreading out their naked feet and trousered legs of an
enormous expanse.

Several dowagers seemed scarcely to be able to breathe from heat, and
the plethora of their own well-fed and pampered flesh. We had now music,
and several attempts were made to get up the indecent Moorish dance,
which, however, was forbidden as too vulgar for such fashionable Jews,
and honoured by the presence of Europeans. Not much pleased with this
spectacle, I looked out of the window into the patio, or court-yard,
where I saw a couple of butchers' boys slaughtering a bullock for the
evening carousal. A number of boys were dipping their hands in the
blood, and making with it the representation of an outspread hand on the
doors, posts and walls, for the purpose of keeping off "the evil eye,"
(_el ojo maligno,_) and so ensuring good luck to the new married couple.

I then mounted the house-top to see a game played by the young men.
Here, on the flat roof, was assembled a court, with a sultan sitting in
the midst. Various prisoners were tried and condemned. Two or three of
the greatest culprits were then secured and dragged down to the ladies,
the officers of justice informing them that, if no one stepped forward
to rescue them, it was the sultan's orders that they should be
imprisoned. Several young Jewesses now clamourously demanded their
release. It is understood that these compassionate maidens who, on such
occasions, step forward to the rescue, and take one of the young men by
the hand, are willing to accept of the same when it may hereafter be
offered to them in marriage, so the contagion of wedding-feasts spreads,
and one marriage makes many.

I now proceed to the supper-table of the men, where the party ate and
drank to gluttonous satiety. Several rabbis were hired to chant, over
the supper-table, prayers composed of portions of Scripture, and legends
of the Talmud.

The dinning noise of bad music, and horrible screaming, called singing,
with the surfeit of the feast, laid me up for two days afterwards. The
men supped by themselves, and the women of course were also apart.

My host, anxious that I should see all, insisted upon my going to have a
peep at the ladies whilst they were supping. Unlike us men, who sat up
round a table, because there were several Europeans among us, the women
lay sprawling and rolling on carpets and couches.

In their own allotted apartments, these gorgeous daughters of Israel
looked still more huge and enormous, feasting almost to repletion, like
so many princesses of the royal orgies of Belshazzar. But this was a
native wedding, and, of course, when we consider the education of these
Barbary women, we must expect, when they have drink like the men, white
spirits for protracted hours until midnight, the proprieties of society
are easily dispensed with. Happily the class of women, who so kept up
the feast, were all said to be married, the maidens having gone home
with the bride.

Very different, indeed, was another distinguished wedding at which I had
the honour of assisting, and which all the European consuls and their
families attended, with the _elite_ of the society of Mogador; this was
the marriage of M. Bittern, of Gibraltar, with Miss Amram Melek. The
bridegroom was the Portuguese Consul, the bride, the daughter of the
greatest Jewish merchant of the south, and consequently the Emperor's
greatest and most honoured debtor. The celebration of this wedding
lasted fourteen days.

On the grand day, a ball and supper were given. All the Moors of the
town came to see the Christians and their ladies dance. Our musician, or
fiddler, kept away from some petty pique, and we were accordingly
reduced to the hard necessity of making use of a drum and whistling,
both to keep up our spirits and serve up the quadrilles. We had,
however, some good singing to make up for the disappointment. His
Excellency the Governor intended to have honoured us with his presence,
but he gave way to the remonstrance of an inflexible marabout, who
declared it a deadly sin to attend the marriages of Jews and Christians.

The marriage guests were of three or four several sets and sorts. There
was the European coterie, the choicest and most select, graced by the
presence of the bride; then the native aristocrats, and here were the
gorgeous sultanas and Fezan spouses; then the lesser stars, and the
still more diminished.

Finally, the "blind, the lame, and the halt," surrounded the doors of
the house in which the marriage-feast was held, receiving a portion of
the good things of this life. The whole number of guests was not more
than two hundred. Plenty of European Jewesses shone as bewitching stars
at this wedding; but all _param_ to us poor Christians. Indeed, there is
as little as no lovemaking, and match-making amongst the isolated
Nazarenes; for, out of a population of some fifty European families,
there are only two marriageable Christian ladies.

The bride is frequently fetched by the bridegroom at midnight, when
there is a cry made, "behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye forth to meet
him!" (Matt xxv--6). This ancient custom prevails most among the Moors.
Once, whilst at Nabal, in Tunis, I was roused from my sleep at the dead
of the night by wild cries, and the discharging of fire-arms, attended
with a blaze of torches. The bridegroom was conveying his bride to his
home. A crowd of the friends of the newly-married couple, followed the
camel which carried the precious burden; all were admitted to the feast
in the court-yard, and the doors were shut for the night.

At the wedding of the lower classes of the Jews, after dancing and
music, there is always a collection made for the bride, or the
musicians. On these occasions, the master of the ceremonies calls out
the names of the donors as they contribute to the support of the
festivities. I was somewhat taken by surprise to hear my name called
out, Bashador Inglez (English ambassador) when I attended one of the
weddings. But the fellow, making the announcement, attracted my
attention more than his flattering compliment. He was dressed in Moorish
costume with an immense white turban folded round his head. I could not
conceive the reason of a Moor taking such interest in feasts of the
Jews.

The secret soon transpired. He was a renegade, who had apostatized for
the sake of marrying a pretty girl. His heart is always with his
brethren, and the authorities good-naturedly allow him to be master of
the ceremonies at these and other feasts, to preserve order, or rather
to prevent the Jews from being insulted by the Mahometans.

There are always a few Jewish renegades in large Moorish towns, just
enough, I imagine, to convince the Mahometans of the superiority of
their religion to that of other nations; for whilst they obtain converts
from both Jews and Christians, and make proselytes of scores of Blacks,
they never hear of apostates from Islamism. The manner, however, in
which these renegades abandon their religion, is no very evident proof
of the divine authority of the Prophet of Mecca. Here is an instance.

A boy of this town ran away from his father, and prostrated himself
before the Governor, imploring him to make him a Mussulman. The
Governor, actuated by the most rational and proper feeling, remarked to
the boy, "You are a child, you have not arrived at years of discretion,
you have not intellect enough to make a choice between two religions."
The boy was kept confined one night, then beaten, and sent home in the
morning.

Another case happened like this when the boy was admitted within the
pale of Islamism. Jewish boys will often cry out when their fathers are
correcting them, "I will turn Mussulman!" A respectable Jew, who
related this to me, observed, "were I to hear any of my sons cry out in
this manner, I would immediately give them a dose of poison, and finish
them; I could not bear to see my children formed into Mussulman devils."

It really seems the vulgar opinion among the Jews and Moors of this
place, that females have no souls. I asked many women themselves about
the matter; they replied, "We don't care, if we have no souls." A Rabbi
observed, "If women bear children, make good wives, and live virtuously
and chastely, they will go to heaven and enjoy an immortal existence; if
not, after death, they will suffer annihilation."

This appears to be the opinion of all the well-educated. But a Jewish
lady who heard my conversation with the Rabbi, retorted with spirit:
"Whether I bear children or not, if my husband, or any man has a soul, I
have one likewise, for are not all men born of us women?"

All, however, are well satisfied with this life, whatever may happen in
the next; male and female Jews and Mussulmen hold on their mutual career
with the greatest tenacity. I made inquiries about suicides, and was
told there were never any persons so foolish as to kill themselves.

"We leave it to the Emperor to take away a man's life, if such be the
will of God!" and yet the Moors are habitually a grave, dreamy and
melancholy people. No doubt the light, buoyant atmosphere keeps them
from falling into such a state of mental prostration as to induce
suicide.

I now found that many people looked upon me, in the language of the
Jewish renegade, as an ambassador, and some went so far as to say, "I
can make war with the Emperor if I like;" others persisted in saying "I
am going in search of the murdered Davidson." A man took the liberty of
telling Mr. Elton. "A very mysterious Christian has arrived from the
Sultan of the English. The Governor hearing that he had ordered a pair
of Moorish shoes, sent word to the shoemaker to be as long about them as
possible. This Nazarene is going to disguise himself as one of us, in
order to spy out our country."

The Moors are certainly a timid and suspicious race. They feel their
weakness, and they are frightened of any Christian who does not come to
their country on commercial pursuits, as a sportsman, or in some
directly intelligible character.




CHAPTER VII.

Interview with the Governor of Mogador, on the Address of the
Anti-Slavery Society.--Day and night side of the Mission
Adventure.--Phillips' application to be allowed to stand with his "shoes
on" before the Shereefian presence.--Case of the French Israelite,
Dannon, who was killed by the Government.--Order of the Government
against Europeans smoking in the streets.--Character of Haj Mousa,
Governor of Mazagran.--Talmudical of a Sousee Jew.--False weights
amongst the Mogador Merchants.--Rumours of war from the North, and levy
of troops.--Bragadocio of the Governor.--Mr. Authoris's opinion on the
state of the Country.--Moorish opinions on English Abolition.--European
Slavery in Southern Morocco.--Spanish Captives and the London
Ironmongers Company.--Sentiments of Barbary Jews on Slavery.


I had an interview by special appointment with His Excellency the
Governor of Mogador regarding the address to be presented to the
Shereefian population from the Anti-Slavery Society. I may at once
premise that from what I heard of Mr. Hay's diplomatic powers and
influence with the Sultan, as well as the peculiar situation in which
Mr. Willshire was placed, encumbered with great liabilities to his
Highness' custom-house, I already abandoned all hopes of success, and
even thought myself fortunate in being able to obtain an interview with
the Governor of this commercial city. To have expected anything more,
would have been extremely unreasonable on my part, under such
circumstances.

It will be as well if I give the address in this place. [24] Friday was
appointed, being a quiet day, and the Mussulman Sabbath, when His
Excellency had little business on hand. The Moors usually devote the
morning of their sabbath to prayer, and afternoon to business and
amusement. Our party consisted of myself, Mr. Willshire, the British
Vice-Consul, and Mr. Cohen as interpreter.

About four o'clock P.M. we found the Governor quite alone, telling his
rosary of jet beads, squatting on his hams upon the floor of a little
dirty shop, not more than eight feet by six in dimensions, with a
ceiling of deep hanging cobwebs which had not been brushed away for a
century.

A piece of coarse matting was spread over the ground floor, and a
sheepskin lay on it for his Excellency to repose upon, but no furniture
was to be seen. There was indeed an affectation of nakedness and
desolation. Pen and ink were placed by his side, and a number of
official papers were strewn about, with some letters bearing the seal of
the Emperor. This shop (or reception room) was situate in an immense
gloomy square; it was the only one open, and here were the only signs of
life.

The Governor had forbidden any of his subjects to be present at the
audience, unwilling and afraid lest any should hear a whisper of the
question of abolition in the orthodox States of his Imperial Master.
Sidi Hay Elarby was an elderly man, with a placid and intelligent
countenance. His manners throughout the interview were those of a
perfect Moorish gentleman. The Governor could not be distinguished from
the people by his dress. He wore a plain white turban, plain burnouse
and a pair of common slippers. In such state, we found the the highest
functionary of this important city.

His Excellency began by asking me how I was, and welcoming me to his
country. I then handed a written speech to the interpreter, who, being a
Jew, pulled off his shoes, and crouching down before the Governor, read
to him paragraph by paragraph. Each passage was further discussed and
replied to by the Governor with energy, nay with vehemence. The
interview lasted till dark--nearly two hours.

The following is a copy of the written speech, which was read for the
purpose of introducing the Address, and supplying topics of
conversation.

"May it please Your Excellency, the mission with which I am charged to
this country is to persuade his Imperial Majesty, the Emperor of
Morocco, to co-operate in any way which his Imperial Majesty may deem
proper, with the people of England for the abolition of slavery. I am
sent to the Court of Morocco by a Society of English gentlemen, whose
object is to persuade all men, in all parts of the world, to abolish the
traffic in human beings, as a traffic contrary to the rights of men and
the laws of God.

"In undertaking this mission, these gentlemen applied to the government
of our Sovereign Queen to furnish me with letters of recommendation to
the British Consuls of this country, the representatives of her Majesty
the Queen of England. Copies of these letters are in the possession of
Mr. Willshire. Those letters express strong sympathy for the objects of
the mission, and require the Consuls to give me their fullest
protection; and so far, our gracious Queen, the government, and the
English people, are all agreed that it is a good thing to address his
Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Morocco, to co-operate with and to
assist them in putting down the traffic in slavery in every part of the
world.

"If the government of the Queen had thought that they should recommend
to your Excellency and your royal master anything contrary to your
religion, they could not have given me letters of introduction to their
consuls in this country. Rest assured that the English people believe it
to be agreeable to the doctrines and precepts of all religions to
abolish the traffic in human flesh and blood.

"I pray, therefore, your Excellency to receive the petition, of which I
am the bearer, from the Society of English gentlemen. Our Government
have already spent three hundred millions of dollars, the money of the
people of England, to destroy the traffic in human beings; every day our
government continues to spend vast sums, adding to this enormous amount
for the same object of humanity. I am sure that, if your Imperial Master
value the friendship of England and the British government, if it be a
politic and good thing for Morocco to be allied with the most powerful
Christian nation in the world, the most certain way to conciliate and
found this alliance on a durable basis, is to cooperate with the people
of England for the abolition of the traffic in slaves, and graciously to
receive this address from the Society of Abolitionists in London.

"We come not to your Excellency with force of arms--this could not be
just; we use only moral persuasion. Our religion disapproves of
compulsion in all such affairs. But I can assure your Excellency that
the English people will never cease, though all nations be against them,
as long as God Almighty holds them up as a people, to endeavour in every
possible way, to persuade and convince the world that the traffic in
human beings is a great crime."

The Governor replied in these terms: "Your mission is against our
religion, I cannot entertain it or think of it, in any way whatever. If,
in other countries, the traffic in slaves is contrary to the religion of
those countries, in this it is not; here it is lawful for us to buy and
sell slaves. Mahomet, our Prophet, has authorized us to do this; but, at
the same time, our slaves must be fed and clothed like ourselves. If you
wish a proof of this, you can go and look at my slaves," (pointing to
his house). "To be holders of slaves, is a merit with us.

"Your address ought to come directly from your Government, from your
Queen to our Sultan. It is not enough that it is recommended by your
Government. The European sovereigns are accustomed to act by the advice
of their counsellors and ministers; but the Sultan of Morocco always
acts without advice or councils. [25] If the address had come from the
Queen, it would have been received, and an answer would have been
returned accordingly. Then if your Government had been offended at the
answer of my master not agreeing with their opinion, they could have
taken their own satisfaction in any way they might have thought proper
(or have made war on us).

"The money which you say the people of England have spent for the
suppression of the Slave Trade, has been, according to our opinion and
religion, misspent, and employed to destroy a system of which we
approve, and consider lawful. Still, I hope God will give your country
more money to spend, and in abundance.

"The English people and the people of Morocco have been, from time
immemorial, great friends, proofs of which I can give you. The guns that
we get from other Christian nations, are never so good as those we get
from England. Besides, we always give the English whatever they ask for.
When the French were at war with Spain and wished to take Ceutra from
her, the English demanded from our Sultan, a small island near Ceutra,
to prevent the French from landing and seizing Ceutra. To this request,
my Sultan acceded; and to show you that the English are our particular
friends, the English gave the island back to us when the war was at an
end."

Mr. Willshire now endeavoured to present the Address of the Anti-Slavery
Society, praying his Excellency to accept it.

On which, the Governor continued with his usual vivacity, "No; I am
sorry I cannot accept it; if I do, the Sultan must also, for now I act
as the Sultan. Indeed, I dare not receive the address, nor write to our
Lord [26] about it. Nor can I look at it, for in case the Sultan asks me
about it, I must swear that I have not touched nor seen the Address. If
I look at it, and then say I did not look at it, the Sultan will order
my tongue to be cut off from the roof of my mouth.

"And further, O Consul! O Stranger! were our Lord to agree with your
Society, and abolish the traffic in slaves throughout his dominions, all
the people would rise up against him in revolt, and the Sultan would be
the first to have his head cut off.

"Therefore, as a good and wise man, O Stranger--which you must be, or
you would not be entrusted with this mission--comply with the orders of
the Sultan's message, given to you by me and your Consul.

"Any thing which you want for yourself or your private use, I will give
it you, even to the whole of this city of Mogador. But for myself I
cannot comply with the prayers of the address, or receive it from your
own or the Consul's hands."

The message of the Sultan alluded to, was in substance to give up the
attempt of abolishing slavery in Morocco, and not to think of going to
the South, but to return at once to England.

The Governor was greatly pleased with the sound of his own voice, and
the skill of his argumentations, and has the character of being a
loquacious and reasoning diplomatist.

This was the public or day side of the mission; there was also the night
side; for where the curiosity of the Moor is excited, it must be
gratified, by fair or other means. It was not surprising, therefore,
that the wily Shereef should wish to know what this Address of an
English Society was, or could be; and if possible to obtain a copy,
although for the sake of the people it was found necessary to repudiate
altogether its acceptance. Accordingly, the next day, Cohen told me a
friend of the Emperor's was anxious to have some conversation with me,
and he begged me to take with me the Address.

It was past ten at night, when alone, with my Moorish guide, I found
myself treading the long narrow streets of Mogador.

The wind howled and the watch-dogs barked; it was so dark that we could
scarcely grope our way, no human being was about; we went up one street
and down another, stealing along our way; as if on some house-breaking
expedition; and I began to feel suspicious, fearing a trap might be laid
for me. Still, I had confidence in the honour of the Moors, I said to my
guide.

"When shall we reach your master's?"

_Guide_.--"God knows; be quiet!"

We continued going through street after street. It was now bitter cold,
and a few drops of rain fell from the cutting wing of the north wind.

To my Guide again.

"Where is the house?"

_Guide_.--"Follow me, don't talk!" After we had passed other streets,
"Is this the street?"

_Guide_.--"Eskut! (hold your tongue)."

We now entered a low dilapidated gateway, with a broken panelled door,
groaning on its hinges.

Again I questioned my guide. "Who lives here?"

_Guide_.--"Mahboul Ingleez (mad Englishman) hold your tongue! Do you
think we Mussulmans will eat you?"

We passed through several court-yards, by the aid of a lantern, which
the guide found in a corner, and then entered a corridor. Here he
grasped me by the arm, in such wise as made me believe I was about to
have my head thrust through a bowstring. I ejaculated; "Allah Akbar!
Mercy upon us!" blending Arabic and English in my fright, and
struggling, fell with the guide against the door at the end of the
passage with a considerable crash. A voice was heard from within.
"_Ashbeek_ (what's the matter?)" My guide returned, "_Hale_ (open)."

A huge negro now laid hold of me, and pulled me up a pair of narrow
stairs which led to a species of loft, in a detached portion of the
house. The case containing the Address fell out of my hands, and was
picked up by the guide. Another apartment within the loft was now
opened, shewing, through a dim and indistinct light, a venerable old
Moor, sitting in the midst of heaps of papers and books, like a midnight
astrologer, or a secret magician. On our entrance, the solitary Moor
raised his eyes, quietly, and said faintly, "Where is it?" My guide now
rushed in, began talking volubly, and made this harangue, thinking,
however, I could not understand him from the rapidity with which he
declaimed.

"Sidi," he said, "this Christian is a frightened fool--and a _baheen_
(ass)--I had the greatest trouble to get him here--he was frightened out
of himself--and now Allah! Allah! I have to take him back again."

I received the compliment in silence, and endeavoured to recover my
tranquillity. But I could not help remarking the contrast between my
noisy and agitated guide, and the grave manner and immoveable quietness
of the recluse. The guide then handed him "the Address," and the Cid
opened the box or case with extreme caution, as if it had contained some
mysterious spell. The Cid now looked up for a moment at the big negro,
who decamped instantly and returned with a teapot and two cups. The two
cups were then filled with tea, one of which was presented to me, but I
had some hesitation about drinking it. The Cid, looked up at me with a
quiet smile, and gently muttered "_Eshrub_! (drink,") I drank the tea
and then waited anxiously to know what was coming next. The Cid
continued to unroll the Address. When this was done, he rolled it up and
again unrolled it, and stared at its Roman characters. He eyed the seal
and ejaculated, "_Haram_!" to himself! alluding, I suppose, to the
figure of the slave in chains, it being prohibited to make figures. The
Cid now paused a moment, then looked at me again, and finally turning to
the Guide said, "_Imshee El-Ghudwah_ (go to-morrow, I'll see.)"

The guide now grasped me again by the hand, scarcely allowing me to bow
a good night to the Cid, and led me back to my lodgings, where I arrived
at midnight. When I awoke in the morning, I really imagined I had been
dreaming an ugly dream, until one of the English Jews called, and said
he was making a translation of the Address to be dispatched to the
Emperor at Morocco, and afterwards he would bring the Address back. The
Address was returned to me about a week afterwards, but whether an
Arabic translation was ever sent to the Sultan, I know no more than the
reader.

Mr. Phillips has applied to the British Vice-consul to know whether, in
case of his going up to Morocco to carry a present for the Belgium
merchants, here, Phillips, being a Jew, will be obliged to pull off his
shoes, which would be depriving him of the rights of British-born
subjects, who stand with their shoes on in the Shereefian presence. The
Consul says he cannot answer the question, and must send a dispatch to
Mr. Hay. Mr. Willshire complimented Phillips: "Ah Phillips, you are
always proposing to me some knotty question. You profoundly perplex the
mind of Mr. Consul-general Hay."

This leads me to notice the affecting case of the Israelite, Darmon, at
one time the French Vice-consul at Mazagran. This young Darmon was fond
of Moorish women, and always intriguing with them. Hay Mousa, Governor
of Mazagran, reported him to the Emperor, and his Highness sent orders
to have him decapitated. It was said afterwards by the Maroquine
Government, that "The order was merely to bring him to Morocco, and
that, when being conveyed as prisoner, and after attempting to run away,
the soldiers of his escort shot him." The Moorish Government also
pretend that Darmon attempted first to shoot the guards who shot him, in
self-defence.

With regard to his being a French Consul, it is said by the French
Government, that he was not their consul at the time, having resigned.
It appears besides that members of his family are French, and others
Moorish subjects. Indeed, these Mauro-European Jews give great troubles
to the consuls; the various persons of a single family being often under
the protection of three or four consuls. It will thus be seen how full
of difficulties was this Darmon affair, and what a door it opened to
tedious Moorish diplomacy. The French Government arranged ultimately
with the Sultan a compromise, a sum of money being paid to the murdered
man's family, and the Governor of Mazagran was dismissed.

When young Darmon fell into disgrace, his father, one of the Imperial
merchants, was at Morocco. The father inquired of the Minister whether
the Sultan would receive his present now his son had fallen into
disgrace. The cruelly avaricious tyrant deigned to accept it of the
father it is said, at the very moment when the order to decapitate his
son had been sent to Mazagran. No doubt it was a barbarous action, but
the extreme imprudence of the young man provoked the government to
extremities. The court was so irritated at the time, that it even issued
an order to place all Jews, natives, foreigners, or Europeans upon the
same level of exposure to Moorish insult and oppression. Speaking to Mr.
Willshire about this order, he smilingly observed: "Say nothing, it will
soon be forgotten." The government never intended to carry it out. Years
ago, the Emperor gave orders that Jews coming from European countries
should be placed on the same footing as native Jews, but the Imperial
edicts were unnoticed.

A curious order was given about smoking some time ago in this city. It
was represented to the Governor that during Ramadan, Kafer-Nazarenes
went about smoking, occasioning the Faithful to sniff up the smoke, and
so break the Holy Fast. The Christians were likewise accused of going
near the mosques to fill them with filthy smoke.

The Governor, in a circular, begged of the Consuls to prohibit their
countrymen, or "subjects," from smoking in the streets. The French
Consul considering this a police regulation, summoned together the
French subjects, and begged of them to comply with the non-smoking
order. Mr. Willshire took no notice of the affair, knowing it would soon
pass over.

Mr, Willshire is a veteran in Morocco, and understands the genius of its
government. He considers the _laissez faire_ system the very best, and
this is all very well, provided the Sultan respects the heads of Her
Majesty's subjects.

Haj Mousa, Governor of Mazagran, who was mixed up with the Darmon
affair, deserves notice from his brutal ferocity towards Europeans. With
great difficulty and damage to their lives, Europeans reside in
Mazagran, and it is not therefore surprising that the imprudent Darmon
fell into the clutches of this provincial tyrant, who probably ensnared
him as a prey. Up to the time of this affair, Haj Mousa had been an
irremoveable governor. The Sultan himself never attempted to displace
him, although he had committed, from time to time, the greatest
enormities. Other governors had been bled, fleeced, and impaled over and
over again; but the caitiff, Haj, always remained in possession of the
fruits of his tyranny.

The reason for this tolerant conduct of the Emperor towards him is, that
when Muley Abd Errahman was in difficulties and obliged to fly for his
life, in the convulsions previous to his reign, Haj Mousa sent the young
prince a mule and thirty ducats; with this, the prince was enabled to
escape, and he saved his life to be afterwards proclaimed
Meer-el-Moumeneen. On receiving the mule and money, he exclaimed in a
transport of gratitude to the Governor of Mazagran, "I will never forget
you!" It is unfortunate the good faith of the Emperor's word has been so
deplorably abused by this tyrant, for it is considered certain, that
though temporarily removed from Mazagran, he will return, or be made
governor of another city.

A Sous Jew called upon me one day, who is well acquainted with the
Shelouh or, Berber of the South. On asking if he would make a
translation of the book of Genesis from Hebrew into Shelouh, he replied:

"No, I cannot. In the first place, the Emperor would cut off my head for
doing such a thing; and, again, it would be a sin to convert the Holy
Hebrew character into such a language of Infidels."

We continued our discussion on a more practical subject.

_Traveller_ (to the Jew)--"I am told that among you, Jews of Morocco, it
is a merit to rob us Christians and the Moors. Your young children are
even praised by their mothers if they commit a theft without being found
out: [27] is this right?"

_The Jew_.--"You are all _Goyeem_ [28] (Gentiles), but it is not true
that we rob you, Christians. If we rob Mussulmen, it's because they rob
us first."

The case really is, the Jews are literally being robbed every day by the
Moors one way or the other, and, if the people do not rob them, the
constituted authorities continue to make exactions under every pretence.
I am inclined, nevertheless, to think, without prejudice, that it is a
received maxim with _all native_ Barbary Jews, "to rob unbelievers,
Moors and Christians, when you can do so _safely_." This was the opinion
which a very respectable European Jew, resident in Tunis, entertained of
his brethren. At the same time, Ihere are numerous exceptions.

Many of the lower classes of Moors likewise, think there is little or no
harm in robbing Jews and Blacks, that is, all who are Infidels and
Christians.

I may mention, in connection with the above, the system of
False-Weights, which is an enormous scandal to this great commercial
city. It appears that almost every tradesman, and every imperial
merchant have two sets of weights, one to buy and another to sell with.
A merchant once had the impudence to cry out to his clerk when weighing,
"Oh, you are wrong, these are my _selling_ weights; bring me my _buying_
weights. Am I not buying?"

A Jew, once purchasing oil from a poor Arab, carried his villainy so far
as actually to make his tare and tret weigh more than the skin-bag when
full of oil, and coolly told the amazed Arab he had no money to give him
for the value received. "Give me back my oil!" cried the Arab. At this
the audacious Jew retorted, "There is none!" A European merchant
interfered, and saved the Jew from the bastinado he so richly deserved.
A Kady hearing of these abominations, took upon himself to begin a
reform, and went about examining weights. For his honest pains, and, in
the midst of his work of reform, the officious functionary received an
order from the Sultan, enjoining him to cease his interference, and
condemning him, as a punishment for his over-righteousness, "_to teach
twelve little boys to read every day, and not to sit at his own door for
the space of one year_." So unthankful, so odious is the task of
reforming in Morocco and many other countries.

This account of the abominable system of two kinds of weights, I derived
from most unquestionable authority, otherwise I could not have given
credit to the statement.

There were incessant rumours of war from the North. The Emperor had got
himself into difficulties with Spain and France. Orders had been sent
down to reinforce this garrison and that of Aghadir. The day before, the
Governor, calling his troops before him, did not shew his usual good
sense and prudence. He thus harangued them:--"Now, let those who want
new arms come and take them, and bring back the old ones. Let all have
courage, and fear not the Christians; fear not, women and children!"
The movement of troops was part of a general measure, extending to all
the coasts, and was, in fact, a review _en masse_ of the disposable
forces throughout the empire. Eighty thousand men were expected in this
city or the suburbs. The Sultan was reported to be on the march towards
the North with an army of 200,000 men.

The Sultan did not expect to make use of his new levies, but the policy
of the thing was good. His Highness is evidently a pacific ruler, he has
but few regular troops, and he pays them badly. His predecessor had a
large army and paid them well.

Great discontent prevailed among the soldiers, and the Emperor never
feels himself secure on his throne.

This apparent crusade against the Infidels has no doubt tended to make
him popular, and to consolidate his power. True, it excited the tribes
of the interior against the Christians, but it was better to inflame
them against the Christians than to lose his own throne.

The French Consul waited upon the Governor for explanations about the
movements of the troops. His Excellency observed, "I am ordered by my
Sultan to defend this city against all assailants, and I shall do so
till I am buried beneath its ruins. Though all the coast-cities were
captured, Mogador should never be surrendered."

Some of the credulous Moors said, "The Shereefs will come from Tafilet,
led on by our Lord Mahomet, and destroy all the cursed Nazarenes. The
Sheerefs will fire against the French leaden balls, and silver balls."
Another observed to me, "If a fleet should come here, it will be
immediately sunk, because our Sultan has ordered every ball to hit, and
none to miss."

This is not unlike what a Turk of Tripoli once said to me about the
Grand Signor and his late reforms. "The Turks will soon be civilized,
because the Sultan has given an order for all the Turks to be
civilized." The large guns of the forts were practised, and the guns of
the grand battery loaded. The infantry continued to practise on the
beach of the port: their manoeuvres were very uncouth and disorderly,
they merely moved backwards and forwards in lines of two deep. The
French Consul, Monsieur Jorelle, discontinued his usual promenade, to
prevent his being insulted, and so to avoid the the painful necessity of
demanding satisfaction.

Mr. Willshire, being well known to the Mogador population, had not so
much to fear. Here is the advantage of a long residence in a country.
The French Government lose by the frequent changing of their consuls.
Still, M. Jorelle was right in not exposing himself to the mob, or the
wild levies who had come from their mountains. The fault of the Governor
was, in exciting the warlike fanaticism of the tribes of the interior
against the Christians, which he ought to have known the city
authorities might have extreme difficulty in keeping within bounds. No
European could pass the gates of the city without being spat upon, and
cursed by the barbarous Berbers.

I paid a visit to M. Authoris, the Belgium merchant, and the only
European trader carrying on business independently of the Emperor. He
represented the commerce of the country to be in a most deplorable
condition. "There is now nothing to buy or sell on which there is a gain
of one per cent. The improvidence of the people is so great that, should
one harvest fail, inevitable famine would be the result, there not being
a single bushel of grain more in the country than is required for daily
consumption. Nor will the people avail themselves of any opportunity of
purchasing a thing cheap when it is cheap; they simply provide for their
hourly wants. They act in the literal sense of 'Take no thought for the
morrow, but let the morrow take care of itself.' As to the Jews, they
feast one day and fast the next." With regard to the excitement then
existing, M. Authoris observed. "This Government, on hearing rumours of
Spanish and French expeditions against the country, must naturally make
use of what power it has, the Holy War power, to excite the people in
their own defence. The Moors cannot discriminate Gazette intelligence.
When a worthless newspaper mentions an expedition being fitted out
against Morocco, the Emperor immediately sees a fleet of ships within
sight of his ports, and hears the reports of bombarding cannon." The raw
levies of Shedmah and Hhaha continued to enter the town, but only a
small number at a time, lest they should alarm the inhabitants. They
went about, peeping into houses, and wherever a door was open they would
walk in, staring with a wild curiosity.

I had some conversation with my Moorish friends respecting the abolition
of slavery. An old doctor observed, "The English are not more humane
than other nations, but God has decreed that they should destroy the
slave-trade among the Christians. This, however, is no praise to them,
for they could not resist acting according to the will and mind of God.
As for the Mussulmen, what they do is for the benefit of slaves,
especially females, who, one and all, are doomed to death; [29] but,
when purchased by the slave-dealers, their lives are spared, and they
are made True Believers. Still, the Mussulmen would assist the English
in destroying the ships which carry slaves;" (as if the Moors had any
fleet).

The number of slaves in this city is from eight hundred to one thousand.
It is difficult to ascertain any thing like the exact number, the
opulent Moors having many negress slaves, with whom they live in a state
of concubinage. Young, rich, and fashionable Moors, I was told for the
first time in a Mahommedan country, have become disgusted with the old
habit of managing and taking a wife early, and adopt the immoral
practice of buying female slaves, by which they avoid, as they say, the
trouble and expense of marrying females of their own rank in Moorish
society. A good Mussulman must however, marry once in his life. Slaves
are imported via Wadnoun from Timbuctoo and Soudan, and even from the
western coast. Negroes of the Timbuctoo market are more esteemed than
those of Guinea, being a stronger and more laborious race. The common
price of a slave in Mogador is from 60 to 90 ducats; one day a beautiful
African girl, freshly exported from the interior, was sold for 160
ducats, or about L20 sterling. This is considered an extraordinary high
price.

Slaves are sold by criers about the streets in Morocco, and most towns,
and not in bazaars, as in the East. But the most remarkable feature of
slavery in this part of the world, is the Christian or European slavery
carried further south, in the regions extending on the line of coast
below Wadnoun, and the adjacent Sahara. Something like a regular system
of Christian slavery is there going on, whilst its head-quarters are not
more than five or six days' journey from this residence of the European
Consuls. This white slavery consists in seizing shipwrecked sailors,
numbers being fishermen from the Canary Islands. We know little about
these poor captives, although we are so near Wadnoun, and are
continually trading with Sous and this country. Mr. Davidson casually
mentions them in his journal.

It is a settled and religious practice of merchants to keep Europeans
ignorant of the south and the Desert; we only hear of these captives now
and then, when one escapes, and after being bought and sold by a hundred
different masters, is fortunate enough to be redeemed; of his companions
in shipwreck, the escaped captive rarely knows anything. They are gone:
they are either drowned near the coast, plundered and massacred, or
carried far away into the Desert, and perhaps for ever. Formerly vessels
navigated through the channel (if it may be so called) of the Canary
Islands and the Wadnoun coast, by which they often got on shoal water,
and were cast away; in this manner, whites were enslaved. Happily now,
masters of vessels have become acquainted with this dangerous coast.
They pass to the east of the Canaries, and fewer vessels are shipwrecked
hereabouts.

The Spanish fishermen of the Canaries are chiefly now made captives.
These poor people are either seized when becalmed near the coast, or
captured on being cast on shore by the furious trade-winds, which sweep
these desolate shores (often nine months out of twelve) and carry utter
destruction with them. The wild and wandering Bedouins in bad weather,
with the true storm scent of the wrecker, patiently watch the coasts,
pouncing on their prey, with the voracity of the vulture, as it is
thrown up from the deep, along the inhospitable shore. Having got the
shipwrecked men in their possession, they act with the cunning and
avarice of slave-dealers, and are aided by the still craftier Jews, who
always render it very difficult for the consular agents to redeem these
unhappy captives. For although a Jew, by the Mahometan law, cannot
purchase slaves, yet by buying them-through Mussulmen, who share in the
profits, from the Arabs who first seized the captives, the slaves are
frequently kept back months in the Desert, being parted from one another
before they can be ransomed.

Sometimes the Arabs alluringly question their captives to see if they
understand any mechanical arts, which are greatly esteemed, being very
useful in these almost tenantless regions; and should they discover that
they do, they carry them away into hopeless captivity, through the wilds
of the Desert, refusing to sell them at any price or offer of ransom.
But those who cannot, or will not make themselves useful, are generally
redeemed by the Mogador Consuls, should they escape being massacred in
the quarrels of the Arabs for the booty when they are first captured.

There is, at the present time, a Spanish fisherman near Wadnoun, waiting
to be redeemed. The Arab Sheikh who holds him, demands two hundred
dollars for his redemption. Mr. Wiltshire objects to the price, as being
too much. Besides this, he is afraid to advance any money for a Spanish
captive's release, lest it should never be refunded. The Spanish
Government, representing a people so chivalrous in bygone times, and so
proud of their ancient exploits over the Moors of this very country, are
not now-a-days over zealous in redeeming their countrymen held in
bondage by these people. Mr. Willshire ransomed a Spanish boy, and
waited several years before he could get this imbecile Government to
refund the money. Espartero at last, however, interfered authoritatively
for the repayment to our generous consul.

In the present case of the poor fisherman, the captive Spaniard lingers
between hope and fear, his only protection being the avarice of his
master, who, like all slave-dealers, is willing to take care of him as
he takes care of his horse. He is one out of four, the other three
having been massacred by the Arabs, or perished on the coast. But, at
present, we know nothing certain of this, although but a few days'
journey from the scene where the disaster took place--so miserable are
our means of information for enabling us to put an end to this system of
Christian slavery. Certainly some representations should be made to the
Emperor, who pretends to have jurisdiction over Wadnoun, and the
adjacent countries, that these captives may be delivered up to the
Consuls of Mogador. A fair remuneration might be given to the persons
bringing them safely to this town.

I am told, the Ironmongers' Company of London have at their disposal
funds for the liberation of such British captives as are enslaved in
Southern Morocco. This money was left by a merchant who himself was made
a slave there; and since that time, owing to the few British captives
redeemed, it has increased to an enormous amount. Not knowing what to do
with the money, the Company, it is said, are about to petition
Parliament to build a school with a portion; but I should suggest that
it would be more in accordance with the original object, and declared
intention of the benevolent, donor, were this large surplus fund devoted
to the redemption of all other Christian captives, of whatever nation or
country. Because two hundred dollars are not forthcoming which could
easily be supplied from the Ironmongers' Company's funds, a poor
Spaniard is condemned to a cruel and hopeless slavery, wandering in the
wilds of the great African wilderness. It is impossible to tell the
number of Christian slaves who perish in the South of Morocco. Many of
the Consular agents of this city are as ignorant of the country as
persons residing in London. This subject absolutely demands the
attention of the governments of Europe. Our humanity and civilization
are in question.

The opinions of the Jews here, are the same as those of American
slave-holders, with this slight difference, that they consider it right
to make slaves of white men and Europeans, as well as of black men,
negroes, and Africans, in which idea they are more consistent than their
Yankee men-selling brethren.

As there are many Barbary Jews at Mogador, more or less under British
protection, I took the liberty of reminding them of their liabilities as
British subjects, by circulating among them copies of Lord Brougham's
Act.

I had some conversation with Rabbi-El Melek and other Jews about the
question of abolition,

_Traveller_.--"What is the opinion of the Jews of this country on the
matter of slavery?"

_Rabbi-El-Melek._--"I will show you," (taking the Hebrew Bible he read)
"'Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren.'"

_Traveller._--"Admitting the curse pronounced here was right, that Ham
and Canaan were the progenitors of the African negroes, and that the
curse was to be extended to all generations of Africa--are these reasons
why the all-Merciful Deity will hold man guiltless who enslaves and
maltreats poor Africans? Now, the Jews have been dispersed all over the
world, and maltreated, if not enslaved, by both Christians and
Mahometans (as now) according to prophecy, but will God hold us
guiltless for persecuting or maltreating you, Jews?"

_The Rabbi_.--"But we are the slaves of God, not of you Christians, and
besides, we are commanded to treat well our slaves in the Scriptures."
Here he quoted many passages from the Pentateuch.

Then followed a desultory conversation, some asserting "that inasmuch as
the slavery of the whites was permitted by God, how much more right had
they to enslave blacks who were the servants of servants!" Others even
added, "If we were Sovereigns of Morocco, we should make slaves of both
Mahometans and Christians." This indeed is the genuine feeling of
Barbary Jews; oppression begets oppression, and wrong begets revenge.
Another observed, "If you ask me what I think as a British subject, and
not as a Jew, I will give you my opinion against slavery."

Such distinctions in morals are not easily admissable, but the Jews
there are acute enough to make them, and are as good Jesuits as those of
Rome. Some cited the cavtivity of Joseph us, as a reason for carrying on
the slave-trade.

On another occasion, I had a conversation with Hassan Yousef, the High
Priest, or Archbishop, as Captain Phillips calls him. The Chief Priest
acknowledged that he who stole a man, whether white or black, was
condemned to death, according to the fair interpretation of the Mosaic
law. He and all Jews were much astonished at the tenor of Lord
Brougham's Act, and got not a little frightened; for all the merchants
of Mogador, Christians and Jews, more or less aid and abet the
slave-trade, all having connections with slave-dealers. At length, our
Jewish Archbishop opined. "Well, well, it is better now, since the
Christians have put down slavery in most of their countries, that we
Jews should follow their example."

It would be useful, and might subserve the cause of civilization, were
the Jews of Europe to take some means of enlightening their brethren of
North Africa on the question of slavery. The Israelites, who have
suffered so much from slavery and oppression, after becoming free
themselves, should endeavour to emancipate those who are still in the
chains of bondage.

The Hhaha levies were about to return to their country; the disposable
force of this province is about 70,000. The troops from Shedma were to
come in after the departure of those of Hhaha. Government were afraid to
bring both together, lest they should fight among themselves. Alluding
to the quarrel of their Sultan with the French, these hostile tribes
mutter to each other, "We must kill our own French first;" that is to
say their own "hereditary enemies."

I went out to see the two levies. These tribes had a singularly wild and
savage aspect, with only a blanket to cover them, which they wrap round
and round their bodies, having neither caps on their heads, nor shoes on
their feet. They were greatly excited against the Christians, owing to
the foolish conduct of the Moorish authorities. The lawless bands spat
at me, and every European passing by them, screaming with threatening
gestures, "God curse you! Infidels." These semi-savages, called out for
the defence of the Empire, were merely armed with a bad gun or
matchlock; some had only knives and clubs. Such levies are certainly
more fit to pillage the Emperor's coast-towns than to defend his
territory against the foreign enemy.

These poor tribes bring their own provisions, a little barley meal, and
olive or argan-oil, or liquid butter; on this being exhausted, they
could stay no longer, for Government supplies them with nothing but bad
matchlocks.

They were loud in their complaint on not receiving any nations, and
threatened to join the French Nazarenes when they arrived. His
Excellency the Governor was very anxious to get rid of them, which was
not at all surprising. So avaricious is the Emperor, that when he can,
he makes the rich Moors supply arms for their poorer brethren, instead
of furnishing them from government depots. And this he insists upon as a
point of religion. The Governor called upon rich Moors to supply the
poor with arms.

A friend of mine who understands Shelouh as well as Arabic, overheard a
characteristic quarrel between a Shedma man and a Hhaha man. The Shedma
people, or inhabitants of the plains, mostly speak Arabic, those of the
mountains, Shelouh, which difference of language embitters their
quarrels, and alienates them from one another.

Shedma man.--"Dog! you have put your hands of the devil into my bag of
barley."

Hhaha man.--"Dog and Jew, you lie!"

Shedma man.--"Jew and Frenchman! there's some one now in your wife's
tent."

Hhaha man.--"Religion of the Frenchman! your mother has been
dishonoured a thousand times."

The maternal honour is the dearest of things amongst these
semi-barbarians. At the mention of this libel on his mother, the Shedma
fellow rushed at the Hhaha man, seizing him by the throat, and
unsheathed a dirk to plunge into his bowels. The scuffle fortunately
excited the instant attention of a group of Arabs close by, who,
securing both, carried them before the Shiekh; who, without hearing the
subject of the quarrel, bastinadoed them both with his own hand. But he
was the Hhaha Sheikh, and the Shedma Sheikh complained to the Governor
of his man having been bastinadoed by the other Sheikh. The Governor
dismissed them, each threatening the other with due vengeance.

It is time to give some account of Mogador. We sometimes spell the name
with an e, Mogadore, the inhabitants call their town _Shweerah_. Square,
[30] in allusion to its beauty, for it is the only town constructed
altogether on geometrical principles throughout Morocco. Its form,
however, is really a triangle. Mogador is a modern city, having been
built in the year 1760 of our era, by the Sultan Sidi Mohammed, under
the direction of a French engineer of the name of Cornut, who was
assisted by Spanish renegades.

The object of Sidi Mahommed was to found a central emporium of the
commerce of the Empire, and a port for the southern capital (Morocco).
This town belongs to the province of Hhaha, whose Berber tribes are its
natural defenders.

The site is a sandy beach with a rocky foundation or a base on the sea,
forming a peninsula, and is supposed to be the ancient Erythraea. The
houses are regularly built, with streets in direct lines, extremely
convenient though somewhat narrow. The residences of the consuls and
European merchants are elegant and spacious. There is a large
market-place, which, on days when the market is not held, furnishes a
splendid parade, or "corso" for exercising cavalry.

The city is divided into two parts; one division contains the citadel,
the public offices, the residence of the governor, and several houses
occupied by European consuls and merchants, which are all the property
of the Sultan; and the other is the space occupied by the houses of the
Moors and Jews.

The Jews have a quarter or _willah_ to themselves, which is locked up
during the night, the key being kept by the police. Nevertheless,
several Jews, especially Imperial traders, are allowed to occupy houses
in the Moorish quarter or citadel portion of Mogador, with the Christian
merchants.

Both quarters are surrounded by walls, not very thick or high, but which
are a sufficient protection, against the depredations of the
mountaineers, or Arabs of the plain. The port is formed by a curve in
the land and the isle of Mogador, which is about two miles from the
mainland.

This isle, on the verge of the ocean, contains some little forts and a
mosque, and its marabout shrines sparkle in the sun. It is a place of
exile for political offenders. When the French landed, at the
bombardment of Mogador, they released fifty or sixty state prisoners,
some of whom had been Bashaws, or ministers of this and former reigns.
The isle, however, is finely situate off the Atlantic, fanned and swept
by healthy gales, and the prisoners suffer only seclusion from the
Continent. The exiles never attempt to escape, but quietly submit to
their destiny.

In the port, there are only ten or twelve feet of water at ebb tide, so
that large vessels cannot enter, but must lie at anchor a mile and a
half off the Western battery, which extends along the north-western side
of the port. Such vessels do not lie there except in the summer months,
and then with extreme caution, being, as they are, right off in the
Atlantic, on one of its most dangerous coasts. There are some tolerable
batteries, but they cannot long resist a European bombardment, which was
demonstrated by the French.

Colonel Keating says, "As far as parapets, ramparts, embrasures,
cavaliers, batteries, and casemates constitute a fortress, this town is
one; but the walls are flimsy, the cavaliers do not command, the
batteries do not flash, and the casemates are not bomb-proof. The
embrasures are so close that not one in three upon the ramparts could be
worked, if they were mounted, which they are not. All their guns, which
have been only twelve months here, are already in very bad order, from
exposure to the climate and surf. The casemates are so damp, that their
interior is covered constantly with a thick nitrous incrustation."
Nevertheless, the Moors have such a superstitious veneration for
fortifications built by a parcel of renegades, that they will not permit
Christians to walk on these ramparts. But what is most unfortunate for
the defence of Mogador, the water could be instantly cut off by
destroying its aqueduct.

The population is between thirteen and fifteen thousand souls, including
four thousand Jews, and fifty Christians, who carry on an important
commerce, principally with London and Marseilles. Excepting Tangier, it
is now the only port which carries on uninterrupted commercial relations
with Europe.

Mogador is situate in the midst of shifting sand-hills, that separate it
from the cultivated parts of the country, which are distant from four to
tweleve miles. These sands have an extraordinary appearance on returning
from the interior; they look like huge pyramidal batteries raised round
the suburbs of the city for its defence. The inhabitants are supplied
with water by means of an aqueduct, fed by the little river, or rill of
Wai Elghored, two miles distant south. The climate hereabouts is
extremely salubrious, the rocky sandy site of the city being removed
from all marshes or low lands, which produce pestiferous miasma or
fever-exhaling vegetation. Rarely does it rain, but the whole tract of
the adjoining country, between the Atlas and the sea, is tempered on the
one side by the loftiest ranges of that mountain, and on the other, by
the north-east trade winds, blowing continually. Mogador is in Lat. 31 deg.
32' 40" N., and Long. 9 deg. 35' 30" W.

The environs offer nothing but desolate sands, except some gardens for
growing a few vegetables, and a sprinkling of flowers, which, by dint of
perseverance, have been planted in the sand of the sea-shore. This is a
remarkable instance of human culture turning the most hopelessly sterile
portions of the world to account. These sands of Mogador are only a
portion of a vast and almost interminable link, which girdles the
north-western coast of the African continent, and is only broken in upon
at short intervals, from Morocco to Senegal, like a shifting, heaving,
and ever-varying rampart against the aggressions of the ocean. Both wind
and sea have probably equally contributed to the formation of this vast
belt of shifting sands.

The distance from Tangier to Mogador, by ordinary courier, is twelve
days, but no traveller could be expected to perform the journey in less
than twenty days.

Other courier distances are as follows:

  Tangier to Rabat          4  days
  Rabat to Fez              2  days
  Fez to Mickas            12  hours
  Rabat to Morocco          8  days
  Mogador to Morocco        21/2 days
  Mogador to Santa Cruz     3  days
  Mogador to Wadnoun        8  days
  Santa Cruz to Teradant    11/2 days

A notice of the interesting, though now abandoned part of Aghadir, may
not be out place here. Aghadir, (called also Agheer and by the
Portuguese, Santa Cruz) means in Berber "walls." It is the Gurt Luessem
of Leo Africanus. The town is small, but strong, and well fortified, and
is situate upon the top of a high and abrupt rock, not far from the
promontory of Gheer, which is the western termination of the Atlas, and
where it dips into or strikes the ocean.

On the south, close by, is the river Sous, and formerly Aghadir was the
capital of this province.

Aghadir has a spacious and most secure port, which is the last port
southwards on the Atlantic. Indeed, this bay is the finest roadstead in
the whole empire. Mr. Jackson says, that during his residence at Aghadir
of three years, not a single ship was lost or injured. The principal
battery of Aghadir, a place equally strong by nature and art, is half
way down the western declivity of the mountain, and was originally
intended to protect a fine spring of water close to the sea. This fort
also commands the approaches to the town, both from the north and the
south, and the shipping in the bay.

Santa Cruz was converted from a fisherman's settlement into a city, and
was fortified by the Portuguese in 1503. Muley Hamed el-Hassan besieged
it in 1536 with an army of fifty thousand men, and owing to the accident
of a powder-magazine blowing up and making a breach, the Sultan forced
an entrance, to the astonishment of the Portuguese, who were all
slaughtered.

In the reign of Muley Ismail, Santa Cruz was the centre of an extensive
commerce carried on between Europe and the remotest regions of Africa,
which obtained for it the name of Bab-el-Soudan, (Gate of Soudan.) The
inhabitants became rich and powerful, and, as a consequence which so
frequently happens to both the civilized and the barbarian, insolent and
rebellious. In 1773, Sidi Mohammed was obliged to march out against the
town to crush a rebellion; and this done with great slaughter, he
ordered all the European merchants to quit the place and establish
themselves at Mogador. The father of this prince had sworn vengeance
against the haughty city, but died without accomplishing his sanguinary
threats. The son, however, did the work of blood, so faithful to vows of
evil and violence is man. Since that period, Aghadir has dwindled down
to nothing, six hundred inhabitants, and others say only one hundred and
fifty. The greater part of these are Jews, who have the finest women in
all the country. Mr. Davidson says the population of Aghadir is
forty-seven Mohammedans, and sixty-two Jews. At Fonte, the port, are
about two hundred Moors. Were any European power to conquer Morocco,
Aghadir would certainy be re-established as the centre of the commerce
in the south. To a maritime nation like England, the repair and
re-opening of its fine port would be the 6rst consideration, and
doubtless a lucrative and extensive commerce could be established
between Aghadir and Timbuctoo. The city is seven leagues south of Cape
Gheer, in latitude 30 deg. 35'.

I shall now give some further details illustrative of the state of negro
slavery. The Fniperor has an entire quarter of the city of Morocco
appropriated for his own slaves, the number of whom, in different parts
of the empire, amounts to upwards of sixty thousand. This is his, the
lion's share. His Imperial Highness, who was accepting presents from
various governors, lately received five hundred slaves from the Sheikh
of Taradant. The trading Moors, believing me to be sent by the British
Government to purchase and liberate all their slaves, have calculated
the whole of the slaves in Morocco to be worth twenty-seven millions of
dollars.

A Moor observed, "I hope to see any calamity befall the country rather
than that of the slaves being liberated," He observed: "God shews his
approbation of slavery by not permitting slaves to rise against their
masters, or the free negroes to invade Morocco, who are infinitely more
numerous. The reason why the English abolished slavery is because the
Queen of England has a good heart, but Mussulmen treat their slaves
well, and do not fear the anger of God." When I mentioned that the Bey
of Tunis and the Imaum of Muscat had entered into treaties for the
suppression of Slavery, the traders observed, "Amongst the Mohammetans
are four sects, but the only orthodox sect is that of Morocco."

There is, however, one class of abolitionists in this country--the
women, or Mooresses. The rumour that a Christian had come to purchase
all the slaves of Mogador soon penetrated the harems. The wife of one of
the most distinguished Moors of Mogador informed a Jewess of her
acquaintance, that she was very happy to hear a Christian was come to
purchase all her husband's slaves, for she was tired of her life with
them. The truth is, respectable Moorish females detest this system of
domestic slavery, and wish to see it abolished, notwithstanding that
they are bred in it, and are themselves little better than slaves. They
see themselves gradually abandoned by the husbands of their youth for
the most ignorant and degraded negress slaves, whom their husbands
purchase one after another as their caprice or passion excites them,
until their houses are filled with these slaves.

The artful negress absorbs all the affection of her master, whilst the
legitimate wife is left as a widow, and is obliged to wait upon these
pampered slaves, whose insolence knows no bounds. The negress slaves
besides, when they bear sons, are treated with great respect; their
children are free by the law, and cannot be disposed of, although the
Moors do sell them when hard pressed for money. Yet even these negresses
are beginning to chatter and clatter about the Anti-Slavery mission,
expressing their satisfaction to our Jewish neighbours. A negress slave
on hearing that a person had come from England to liberate all the
slaves, jumped up and called on God to bless the English nation.

This excitement in the domestic circles of Mogador raises the bile of
the slave-dealers. A fellow of this sort beckoned me to come to him as I
was passing in the street, and thus began: "Christian, if you dare
attempt to go to the south, we shall cut you up into ten thousand little
pieces."

Traveller.--"You will not lay a finger upon me, nor throw a handful of
sand in my face unless it please God."

Slave-dealer.--(Taken aback at this reply, he drew in his horns), "Well,
how much will you give us apiece for our slaves."

_Traveller_.--"I shall give you nothing; you have no right to sell a
man, a brother, like yourself."

_Slave-dealer_.--"It's our religion."

_Traveller_.--"It's not your religion to sell Mussulman; you sell the
children of your own slaves, born in your houses, and who are
Mussulmen?" The slave-dealer, puzzled and angry, was silent a few
minutes, and then said, "Ah, well, all's right, all's from God."

I received a visit from a Hajee under peculiar circumstances. Passing
through Tunis on his return from Mecca last year, his slave, hearing
that all the slaves were liberated in the country, ran away. In vain his
master attempted to catch him. There were no Christians in the country
of the Mecca impostor, who kept _manhunting hounds_. This is the
peculiar glory of Christian lands. Tunis is not so "go a-head" as Yankee
freedom-land. The consequence was the pilgrim left without his slave. He
then, strange to say, applied to me to procure him back his slave.
Thinking this a good opportunity to agitate the authorities here OR the
question, I recommended him to apply to the Governor, who should write
to the Emperor, and also to the Bey of Tunis, and so forth. I had
visitors daily who asked me when I should be ready to purchase the
slaves and liberate them. Arabs from the remotest districts came to me;
and I was told that there is not a town or district of the empire, but
has heard of the English going to liberate all the slaves of Morocco.

I have studiously avoided giving details of the cruelties and hard
bondage of slavery in and around Morocco. On the contrary, I have stated
it to be the opinion of the Europeans and Consuls in Tangier, that
slaves are well treated in this country. Such an opinion ought to weigh
with all. [31] At the same time, in self-defence, as an abolitionist,
and occupied with a mission for the extinction of slavery in this
country, I must partly uplift the veil, however disgusting it may be to
my readers. A portion of the dark side of the picture must be exhibited.
Of the march of slave-caravans over the Sahara, I shall say
nothing--that is fully reported in my previous publication. When the
slaves arrive in Morocco, they are inarched about in different
directions of the country for sale. During their passage through a
populous district like this, where the females are exposed to the brutal
violence of ten thousand casual visitors, or agents of police and
government, it is the ordinary and revolting practice to adopt means one
cannot describe for the purpose of preserving their honour. Private
punishments are frequent; to my certain knowledge, a female slave was
tied up by the heela, head downwards, and, after being cruelly
flagellated, was left for dead by her, pitiless master. She was at last
cut down at the intercession of her mistress whose humanity got the
better of her hatred and jealousy. While I was at Mogador, a negress had
two of her children torn away from her to be sold at Morocco, to pay the
debts of her master, who was a Moor. The children were sons of the man
who sold them into bondage! The mother was inconsolable, ran about
distracted, and probably will never recover from the blow. These facts
are enough, and with any human man they will out-weigh all other
instances, however numerous, of alleged good treatment on the part of
Moorish slave masters. [32]

I took a ride with Mr. Elton on the sandy beach. There is a fort in
ruins, at about half an hour's distance, illustrating most emphatically
the parable of the man who built his house upon the sands.

This fort, which was to command the southern entrance of the harbour, is
supposed to be of Spanish construction, and built about the same time as
the city.

It was once of considerable size and height, but is now a fallen and
ruined mass, its foundations "upon the sands" having given way. Storms
along this shore are often terribly destructive, we passed a portion of
the hulk of a vessel completely buried in the sand. [33]

Notwithstanding the sober and taciturn character of the Moor, he can
sometimes indulge himself in pleasantry and caricature. The Moors have
made caricatures of the three last emperors, assisted by some Spanish
renegade artist: these Princes are Yezid, Suleiman, and Abd Errahman.
Yezid is represented as throwing away money with one hand, and cutting
off heads with the other, depicting his ferocity in destroying his
enemies, and his generosity in heaping favours on his friends. Suleiman
is represented as reading the Koran, in the character of a devout and
good man. The present Sultan is hit off capitally, with one hand holding
a bag of money behind him, and with the other stretched out before him,
begging for more.

H B could not have better caricatured the three Shereefian Sultans. The
Moors affirmed that Muley Abd Errahman will keep faith with no one where
his avarice is concerned, and, when he can, he will sell a monopoly
twice or thrice, receiving money from each party. Of his meanness and
avarice, I adduce two anecdotes. Four years ago, Muley-Abd Errahman
ordered some blond for his Harem from Mr. Willshire. Just when I was
leaving Mogador, his Imperial Highness graciously returned it to our
merchant with the message--"It's too dear." Not long before, a man was
murdered upon the neutral land of two adjacent provinces, and a thousand
dollars were taken from his baggage. In such cases, the Governor of the
district is mulcted both for the murder and robbery. The Emperor claimed
two thousand dollars from one of the provinces, for the father of the
murdered man. This province escaped upon the plea that the murder had
not been committed within its territory. The other province refused to
satisfy the demand for the same reason. His Imperial Highness then made
both provinces pay 2,000 dollars each, keeping one two thousand for
himself, for the trouble he had of enforcing payment.

The people of Sous not long ago had a quarrel, which the Emperor
fomented. Its Sheikhs fought; his Imperial Highness sent troops to turn
the balance of the fray, and to pacify the country. Then, he made the
belligerents pay each 40,000 dollars, as pacification-money, the value
of which he levied on slaves. In this politic way, the Imperial miser
replenishes his coffers, and "eats up" his loving subjects.

I made the acquaintance of Mr. Treppass, the Austrian consul, and
Chancellor of the French consulate. Mr. Treppass has been upwards of
twenty years in this country, and was himself once an Imperial merchant,
but sold his business, preferring a small stipend and his liberty, to
being a vassal of the Emperor, fed in luxury and lodged in a fine house.
We had a long conversation upon the various topics connected with this
country.

Mr. Treppass says, the present system of the court is resistance to all
innovation, to all strangers. But the pressure of the French on the
Algerine frontier is agitating the internal state of this country.
Money, which in other countries goes a long way, will almost do every
thing with the Government of Morocco. It will also effect much with the
people. Some fifty years ago, a Geneose merchant, resident in Mogador,
had the two provinces of Hhaha and Shedma under his control, and could
have made himself Sultan over them; this he effected solely by the
distribution of money. The Sultan of the time was in open war with a
pretender; his Imperial Highness begged for the assistance of the
all-powerful merchant. The merchant bought the affections and allegiance
of the people, and firmly established the Sultan on his throne.

The influence of the merchant was now prodigious, and the Sultan himself
became alarmed. Not being able to rest, and being in hourly dread of the
Genoese, the Sultan ordered his officers to seize the merchant secretly,
and put him on board a vessel then weighing anchor for Europe. When the
merchant was placed on board, this message was delivered to him--"Our
Sultan is extremely obliged to you, sir, for the great services you
rendered him, by establishing him on his throne! but our Sultan says,
'If you could place him on the throne, you could also pull him off
again.' Therefore you must leave our country. Our Sultan graciously
gives you a portion of your wealth to carry away with you!" The officers
then shipped several chests of money, jewels, and other valuables to be
placed to the account of the merchant, and the Sultan-making Genoese
quitted Morocco for ever.

The Moors reported to me that the French were building some factories,
with a fort, upon some unclaimed land along the coast, equidistant
between Aghadir and Wadnoun. It is probably near Fort Hillsboro of the
maps, and which Mr. Davidson calls Isgueder. A Moor was accused by the
authorities of Mogador of being mixed up with the transaction, and
immediately sent to the south, where he has not been heard of since.
Another report is that the French are only building a factory. The spot
of land has near it a small port and a good spring of water; quantities
of bricks and lime have been deposited there; French vessels of war from
the Senegal have been coasting and surveying up and down, touching at
the place.

The new port is called Yedoueesai. I inquired particularly respecting
this project; but Mr. Treppass stated positively, that the French had
wholly abandoned the idea of establishing commercial relations with the
Sheikh of Wadnoun, or any tribes thereabouts, whatever might have been
their original intentions. Vessels of war have frequently visited the
coast of Wadnoun, finding it the worst in all Africa. They, however, now
maintain friendly relations with the Sheikh, in the event of shipwrecks
or other disasters, happening to French vessels.

Nevertheless, it was at the particular request of the French Consul of
Mogador, that his Government broke off all communications with the
Sheikh, the Emperor having repeatedly complained to the Consul against
this intercourse assuming a commercial or diplomatic character. [34] The
whole coast, from the port of Mogador to the river Senegal, has been,
within the last few years, surveyed by the French vessels of war,
particularly by Captain E. Bouet; and there is sufficient evidence in
the reports of the people, and the remonstrances of the Maroquine
Government, to prove that the French did attempt a settlement on the
part of the coast above stated, but that it failed.

The French took the idea of the undertaking from Davidson, who proposed
to Lord Palmerston to enter into communication with the Sheikh of
Wadnoun, and establish a factory on the coast, somewhere about the river
Noun, just below Cape Noun. A British vessel of war was sent down with
presents for the Sheikh, and to ascertain the whereabout of the fine
harbour reported to exist there by the Sheikh and his people. This
attempt of our government was as fruitless as that of the French
afterwards. Indeed, at the very time an English brig of war was
searching about for this port, and seeking an interview with the Sheikh
of Wadnoun on the coast, Davidson was murdered on the southern frontier
just as he was penetrating the Sahara.

It is not improbable, however, that the knowledge of this recommendation
of Davidson, which, from the Sheikh's people themselves, would naturally
reach the court of Morocco, might have excited that jealous court to
compass in some way his death, or at any rate thwart his expedition to
Timbuctoo, for the Emperor is exceedingly jealous of any European
holding communication with the south. The Sheikh Barook is, in spite of
all this, very anxious to begin an intercourse with Europeans; and not
long ago, a messenger arrived with a bag of money for the Jew, Cohen,
telling him to take some out of it, and to go to the Sheikh who wished
to see him. But Cohen would not expose himself to the displeasure of the
Emperor, although he has English protection.

Wadnoun is a quasi-independent Sheikhdom of the empire. The Sheikh of
Wadnoun pays no tithes nor other imposts, and only sends an annual
present as a mark of vassal-homage to the Emperor. Sous, which adjoins
this province, is more immediately under the power of the Sultan of the
Shereefs, but the tithes are not so easily collected in the south as in
the north. Much depends on the ability of the governor, who rules the
whole of the district in the name of the Emperor. The imperial authority
is maintained principally by prompting disunion amongst the Sheikhs;
Sous being divided into numerous districts, each district having an
independent Sheikh.

By confusion and divisions among themselves, the Emperor rules all as
paramount-lord. When will people learn to be united, so that by union
they may win their freedom and independence? Alas! never. Wadnoun is
treated, however, very tenderly; for if the Emperor were to attempt the
subjugation of this country, the malcontents of Sous would join the
Sheikh, and his authority would probably be overthrown in all the south.

Sous is the richest of these provinces, and equal to any other of the
northern districts. Its trade in dates, ostrich feathers, wax, wool, and
hides, particularly in gums, almonds, and slaves, is very great. All the
Saharan caravans must pass through this country, except those proceeding
_via_ Tafilett to Fez. Teroudant, its capital, is a very ancient city,
and was built by the ancient Berbers. It has a circumference of walls
capable of containing eighty thousand people, but the actual population
does not exceed twenty thousand. Its inhabitants are very industrious,
and the Moors excel in the art of dyeing.

Noun, or Wadnoun, as this country and its capital are sometimes called,
Mr, Davidson briefly describes as a large district, having many clusters
of inhabitants. The town where the Sheikh resides, is of good size, and
has a millah, or Jew's quarter, besides a good market. It stands on the
river (such as it is) distant twenty two miles from the sea.

The river Noun rises in the mountains above Souk Aisa or Assa, and is
there called Wad-el-Aisa; and, passing through the district of Wadnoun,
it takes the name of Assaka. The ancient name of this river was Daradus.
The territory around is not very fertile on account of the neighbourhood
of the Desert, but produces gum, wax, and ostrich feathers in abundance.
The inhabitants are mostly Arabs with a sprinkling of Shelouh, estimated
by Graeberg [35] at 2,000. The population is somewhat thickly scattered;
there are at least twenty villages between the district of Stuka and
Wadnoun.

The annexed is a sketch of Wadnoun after the design left by Mr.
Davidson.

[Illustration]

Wadnoun is an important rendezvous of caravans. Many Timbuctoo caravans
break up here, and some Saharan. Several Saharan merchants come no
further north, disposing of their slaves and goods to Maroquine
merchants, who meet them in this place.

It is safe travelling through these countries, provided no extraordinary
plot be laid for taking away a traveller's life, as in the case of
European explorers attempting to penetrate the interior. Mr. Treppass
thinks that, notwithstanding the ill-will of the Moorish Government,
Davidson could have succeeded in his attempted journey to Timbuctoo had
he been more circumspect. He gave out to all persons whom he met that he
was going to Timbuctoo. This insured his being stopped and murdered _en
route_ by some party or other, more especially as he at last abandonod
the idea of protecting himself by a caravan-party, and started alone.
But I am not altogether of this opinion. Too much publicity is certainly
injurious to a journey of discovery, and far and near awakens attention
and suspicion; but a too sudden and unexpected appearance in the towns
of the Desert, equally excites distrust and suspicion, if not hostile
feelings.

Mr. Robertson, whilst at Morocco, heard one of the numerous versions of
the death of Mr. Davidson. He is said to have been killed by the mere
freak of a young Arab, who wished to have the pleasure of killing a
Christian, and who called out to his companions, "Come, let us go and
have a shot at the Christian." The party of Arabs to whom this
mischievous young man belonged, was afterwards extremely grieved at what
had been done. One of the Arabs, in plundering the baggage, lost his
hand by breaking a bottle containing aqua fortis. The glass cut a large
gash, and the aqua fortis entering immediately, consumed the hand. The
people cried out, "The devils of the Christian are in the water!" From
all I have heard, the great fault of Davidson appears to have been his
wishing to travel as like "a fine gentleman." This prejudiced all his
travelling-companions against him, and could not fail to render him
unpopular wherever he went.

It is of no use for a man to cry out in the Desert, "I am an
Englishman!" he must exclaim, "I am an Arab, and will do and suffer like
an Arab." If any one were to ask me, "What would carry a roan to
Timbuctoo through the Desert? is it courage, or money, or prudence?" I
would reply, "The first thing is suffering, the second is suffering, and
the last is suffering." [36] I consulted an old man on this journey to
Timbuctoo. He could not undertake a voyage being too old. He mentioned
names of places _en route_, and said they travelled by the stars, which
star-travelling is all stuff. He recommended going by sea as much
nearer. Very little satisfactory information can be obtained from
Maroquine Moors, who would rather mislead than direct you.

I endeavoured to open a correspondence with the South on the
Anti-Slavery question. At first, I thought of going to Wadnoun on
receiving an invitation from the Sheikh, but when I proposed this to Mr.
Wiltshire, he insisted on my relinquishing such a project, inasmuch as
having placed myself at the direction of the Consul-General, as
recommended by the Earl of Aberdeen, I was not at liberty to differ from
the advice, which Mr. Hay and himself might tender me. I saw there was
some reason in this, and submitted though with great reluctance.
However, I wrote two letters to Sheikh Barook of Wadnoun, stating the
views and objects of the Anti-Slavery Society.

I had some difficulty in finding a courier, who would undertake the
delicate mission of conveying the letters. But Mr. Treppass and the
French Consul, M. Jorelle, felt themselves more at liberty in the matter
than our Consul, and determined to assist me, M. Jorelle very justly
observing, "We will sow the seeds of liberty, if we can do nothing
more." Indeed, I am greatly obliged to that gentleman for the interest
he took in my mission, and the assistance he rendered me on this and
other occasions. After my return to England, I received two letters from
the Sheikh in answer to those I had written to him. The Sheikh, afraid
lest his letter might fall into the hands of Government, after many
compliments, begs me to get the Emperor first to move in the question,
adding, "what he makes free, we will make free;" for he says in another
place, "We act as he acts, according to the _treek_ (ordinance) of God
and his Prophet."

Sheikh Barook also protests that he has but little power in these
matters, living as he does in the Desert. As I did not seek for any
thing beyond an answer to my letters, and was only anxious that he
should know the sentiments of the Anti-Slavery Society, I was not all
disappointed. I knew too much of the pro-slavery feeling once existing
in a strong party in England, and the mighty struggles which we had
passed through to obtain British Abolition, to expect anything more than
a respectful answer to antislavery letters from a Prince of the Desert,
whose revenues were raised chiefly from the duties levied upon
slave-caravans passing through his territory. I only attempted to
scatter the seeds of liberty over the slave-tracks of the Desert,
leaving the budding forth and the growth to the irrigating influences of
that merciful and wise God, who has made all men of one flesh and blood.

I visited the families of Jewish merchants during the Passover, in
company with Mr. and Mrs. Elton. Christians here visit the Jews twice a
year, at the feast of the Passover and Tabernacles. In return, Jews
visit Christians on New Year's day. This laudable practice promotes
social harmony between the Jews and Christians.

In the house of one of our Jewish friends (Mr. Levi's) I assisted at the
celebration of the evening of the Passover. There is nothing very
particular in this ceremony, except a great deal of reading. The
drinking of the four cups [37] of wine, and the eating of the bitter
herbs, emblems of the joys and the sorrows attending the deliverance
from Egyptian bondage, are the more difficult parts of the ceremony. The
children naturally feel most the disagreeableness of eating the bitter
herbs, and several times, as soon as they put them into their mouths,
they spat them out again under the table. The drinking of an excessive
quantity of wine, is also attended with not a little inconvenience, and
one would think Bacchus was the deity worshipped, and not the God of the
Jews and Christians. When will mankind learn that violation of the
physical economy of their nature can never be acceptable to the Great
Creator?

I do not say that European Israelites indulge so much in these excesses
as Barbary Jews, but I imagine that the germ of the debauch is found in
the Talmudical religion of both classes. But, since I should be very
sorry were a Jew to hold up to me the mummeries of Popery or of the
Greek Church, as the mirror of my own religion, I am not disposed to
animadvert upon the generally decorous worship of European Israelites.

It requires three full days to get through this business of visiting. In
truth, it is a very serious affair, for we were obliged to eat cake, and
sip sherbet, or white brandy, at every house we went to, otherwise we
should confer an affront upon our friends. At all times, a great
quantity of white brandy, which the Jews distil themselves, is drunk,
but especially on these occasions.

The Governor of Mogador gave orders, not long ago, that no Mussulman
should enter the Jewish quarter, to prevent the faithful from being
seduced into drinking this insidious spirit. I shall just mention what a
Christian is obliged to conform to, whilst visiting the Barbary Jews on
these high days and holidays.

1st. You must eat a piece of cake, at least of _one_ sort, if not of
several kinds, and drink a little brandy, wine somets, or boiled juice
of the grape, or sherbet. In many of the houses, they give nothing but
brandy, which is tastefully placed out on small round tables, as at a
pastrycook's shop.

2nd. You must admire the new dresses of the ladies, who are radiantly
and sumptuously attired "in flaming purple and refulgent gold," their
ornaments likewise of gold, silver, and all manner of precious stones;
for the daughters of Israel are, as on bridal days, all begemmed,
bejewelled, and diamonded, stuck over with gems as thick as stars "seen
in the galaxy or milky-way." On these festivals, it is absolutely a
matter of orthodox observance that the Jews and Jewesses should wear
something new. Some have entirely new dresses.

3rd. Any thing new or remarkable in the house, or household furniture,
must be noticed or admired.

4th. You must carry with you in your memorandum-book, or at the tip of
your tongue, a good assortment of first-rate compliments of the season.

If these are spiced with a little scandal of your neighbours, or the
party you have just left, so much the better; they are more relished.

Now you are obliged to visit twenty or thirty families per diem; and you
are literally passing through doors, square-courts, and corridors,
crossing patios and quadrangles, walking up and down stairs, getting up
and sitting down from morning to night, during these three mortal days.
It will be seen then, that these Passover and Tabernacle visits are
tremendous affairs, and require Herculean strength to get through their
polite duties. They may be days of jovial festivity to Jews, but
certainly they are days of labour and annoyance to Gentiles.

But I must now give an account of one or two remarkable personages whom
we visited. The first was Madame Bousac, a Jewess of this country. Her
father was a grandee at Court in the days of former emperors, and the
greatest merchant of his time, and she represented as an aristocrat
among her people, a modern Esther, standing and pleading between the
Sultan and her nation. This lady is the only native woman in the
country, Mooress or Jewess, who has tact or courage enough to go and
speak to the Emperor, and state her request with an unfaltering voice
beneath the awful shadow of the Shereefian presence! Madame Bousac
accompanied the merchants to Morocco, to pay her respects to the
Emperor. Among other modest or confidential demands which the lady made
on the Imperial benevolence, was that of an advance to her husband of
ten thousand dollars. His Imperial Highness was immediately obliged to
give a formal assent before his court.

She then visited the Harem, and felt herself quite at home. All the
ladies, wives or concubines of the Emperor, waited upon her; and served
her with tea and bread, and butter.

The presentation of bread and butter and cups of tea, is said to be the
highest honour conferred on visitors, but why or wherefore I have not
heard.

Madame Bousac gave us some account of the Morocco harem, which we may
suppose is like that of Fez and Miknas. The number of these ladies was
some two hundred. They are all attired alike, except the four wives, who
dress a little more in the style of Sultanas. I am sorry to be obliged
to disabuse the reader of the romance and oriental colouring attached to
our ideas of the harem, by giving Madame Bousac's simile of those
angelic houries. This lady said, "they are like a string of
charity-school girls going to church on a Sunday morning."

Their penurious lord keeps down their pin-money to the lowest point, and
is not more liberal to his ladies than to his other subjects. Former
sultans were accustomed to allow their ladies half a dollar a day, but
these have but twopence, or at least fourpence. Muley Abd Errahman even
traffics in his beauties, and will now and then make a present of one to
a governor, in consideration of receiving an adequate return of money,
or presents. Sometimes, the Moors pay their Shereefian Sultan a similar
compliment, by presenting him with slaves from their harem. [38]

Madame Bousac is, of course, a perfect lady according to Moorish ideas,
but her fascinations on the mind of the Emperor, arise more from her wit
and ability than her feminine grace and delicacy. She is anything but a
beauty, according to our ideas, being of a dark complexion, of middle
height, of large and powerful muscular proportions, very upright, as if
bending backwards, and with a hoarse and masculine voice. Like most
women in this part of the world, she is married to a man old enough to
be her father, or even grandfather, being even more than double her age.

She herself may be about thirty, at which age the beauty of Barbary
women is gone for ever. Such is the court-dame who has courage enough to
speak to the Emperor of Morocco in public. She conversed with us about
her affairs, telling us the Emperor had not yet advanced to her husband
the loan of 10,000 dollars as promised, nor did she expect it, for she
knew his avarice. "Rather would he sell one of his Sultanas." But he had
sent her a present of four haiks, which she shewed us; they were
extremely fine and white. "These," she observed, "are the ten thousand
dollars paid in private, but which the Sultan could not refuse me in
public."

Another character whom we visited, was the distinguished Rabbi,
Coriante. The priest entertained us with dissertations upon various
subjects. First of slavery. "It is unlawful to steal blacks, the Mosaic
law denouncing such theft with the punishment of death. Nevertheless, if
the Jews of this country had the power, they would enslave the
Mussulman, and well castigate them."

This latter remark, Coriante uttered with an emphasis, denoting the
revenge which his countrymen would inflict upon their Mahometan
oppressors, who had kept them in chains for a series of ages. He
remarked, however, that the Sultan might give way on the question of
negro slavery, after the first shock to his prejudices.

The Rabbi treated us with wine, but one of us, moved by curiosity,
having touched the bottle, he remarked to his daughter in an under-tone;
"It's all gone," (the rest of the wine is spoiled). Among these
extremely superstitious Barbary rabbies, it is a pollution to their wine
if a Christian touch even the bottle containing the juice of the grape,
and they will not drink it afterwards.

We asked the reason of his not being able to drink, and found it was,
first, because women work in the vineyards, and the second, because the
Pope pronounces his blessing upon the vintage. After these Jews have
eaten meat, they are obliged to wait some time before they can eat
butter, or drink milk; in fact, their superstitions are numberless. The
Rabbi read to us portions of the proverbs of Solomon, and told us
Solomon was well acquainted with steam engines and railways, "Only they
were of no use in the Holy Land when God was always with his people." He
then gave us his blessing, and me this solemn warning. "Take care the
Emperor does not cut off your head, as he has cut off the head of our
young Darmon." [39]




END OF VOL. I.




[1] According to Xavier Darrieu.

[2] It has always been the policy of Mahometan States to send their
troublesome subjects, such as were not considered rebel enough to
decapitate or to imprison, on a pilgrimage to Mecca. Instead of
expiating the sins of a buoyant patriotism at the galleys or the
Bermudas, they are sent to slake their patriotic ardour at the holy
wells of El-Kaaba.

[3] The late Emperor of Morocco.

[4] "Our Lord Jesus," the name by which the Moors, always mention Our
Saviour.

[5] Moors entertain the lowest opinion possible of Spaniards. In an
intercepted correspondence of the Emperor of Morocco, found at the
Battle of Isly, Spaniards are called, "The most degraded of the human
race."

[6] The climate of North Africa is remarkable for rusting everything
which can contract rust. This may be the reason of the Moors
representing Spain and other European countries as free from rust,
because there it is not so soon contracted.

[7] Lord Palmerston proceeded in the same determined way with the Schah
of Persia (See Parliamentary Papers on the Slave Trade, class D,
presented 1848). But Colonel Shiel was fortunate in obtaining several
opinions of Mahomet that--"The worst of men is the seller of men"--was a
powerful auxiliary. The perseverance of the Minister and his agents in
Persia has been crowned with complete success; the Schah has issued a
firman prohibiting the Slave Trade in his territories. This firman will
complete our command over the Persian Gulf and the Arabian seas, and
enable our cruisers to intercept the slavers from the eastern shore of
Africa.

[8] No people understand better than the Moors the noble feeling of
gratitude, contained in the words "Non nobis, Domine," &c.

[9] Although _Sultana_, i.e., "Sultanness or Princess," is a frequent
name for a woman in this country, I hare never heard of a man being
called Sultan; and, indeed, I imagine the jealousy of the reigning
sovereign would never permit the use of such a name. But even in this
country, where women are treated as so many household chattels, Moorish
gallantry is sufficient to overlook these trivial or serious
pretensions.

[10] "Souvenir d'un Voyage du Maroc," par M. Rey, Paris.

[11] The value of this ducat is about half-a-crown English money.

[12] Count Qrabert gives the following account of Maroquine Blacks: "The
Blacks who form a very numerous part of the population are most of them
slaves, and as it is customary in barbarous countries, become an object
of trade, though not to be compared with that carried on in other parts
of Barbary. The Black is generally of a soft and kind disposition, bears
fatigue with patience, and shows a serene and lively temper, totally
different in that respect from the Moor, who is taciturn and sullen.
Some of them have become men of prosperity and note, after having
recovered their liberty. They are renowned for their fidelity, and form
the most numerous part of the body-guards of the Sultan; that body-guard
makes about the half of the army, which on an average compose a total of
ten thousand men. The greater part of those Blacks comes from
Senegambia, Guinea, and the dominions of the Fellah or Fellani."
(_Specchio geografico e Statistico dell' Impero di Marocco. Geneva._)

[13] Some time since, when the French Government were anxious to get
supplies of grain from the Levant, for the north of France, they sent
steamers to the Straits, to be ready to tow the vessels through, an
example worthy of imitation, in other times besides seasons of famine.

[14] This conduct of Roman Catholic sailors has often been noticed.
Mahometans do the same, and resign themselves to fate, _i.e._, make no
effort to save themselves; the only difference is, they are less noisy,
and more sullen in their spiritless resignation.

[15] The entrance to the port of Mogador, however, is difficult to all
seamen. We were besides in the depth of winter. The Prince de Joinville
describes his mishaps during the height of summer, or in August, when
placing his vessels in position before the town. He says in his report
of the bombardment: "New difficulties, and of more than one kind awaited
us. For four days, the violence of the wind and the roughness of the sea
prevented us from communicating with one another. Anchored upon a rocky
bottom, our anchors and cables broke, and the loss of them deprived us
of resources which were indispensable in order to obtain our object.
Some vessels had only one chain and one anchor. We could not think of
maintaining ourselves before Mogador under sail. The violence of the
currents and of the gale, would probably have carried us too far, and we
should have lost the opportunity of acting. Besides, in causing the
steamers to get to proceed with us, they would have consumed their fuel,
and in leaving them by themselves they would be exposed to run short of
provisions and water. It was therefore necessary to remain at anchor. At
last, the wind abated, and there remained of the hurricane of the
preceding days, a considerable swell from N.N.W. Then the vessels were
tormented by the swell, and became ungovernable."

[16] The Ancient Numidians rode without saddle or bridle They were
celebrated as the "reinless" Numidians--

"Numidae infraeni."--(AEnaid, iv., 41.)

We are aware that another meaning to _infraeni_ has been given, that of
"indomitable;" but the peculiarity of these horsemen riding without
reins is the usual rendering. But ordinarily, the modern Moorish cavalry
is very comfortably mounted. Their saddles, with high backs, are as
commodious as a chair. The large, broad, shovel-stirrups enable the
rider to stand upright as on terra firma, whilst the sharp iron edges of
the stirrups goring the ribs of the poor animal, serve as spurs. These
lacerating stirrups are tied up short to the saddle, and the knees of
the rider are bent forwards in a very ungainly manner. Nevertheless, the
barb delights in the "powder play" as much as his master, and--

  "Each generous steed to meet the play aspires,
  And seconds, with his own, his master's fires;
  He neighs, he foams, he paws the ground beneath,
  And smoke and flame his swelling nostrils breathe."

[17] The fire of the Barbary horse is generally known, but few reflect
upon the power of endurance which this animal possesses. I have known
them to go without water for two or three days when crossing the Desert,
during which time they will only receive a small measure of corn or a
few dates. On the coast, they are driven hard a long day, sweating, and
covered with foam, their sides bleeding from the huge sharp-edged
stirrups. Without the slightest covering, they are left out the whole
night, and their only evening meal is a little chopped barley-straw.

Our European horses would perish under such circumstances, and the
French have lost the greater part of the horses they imported from
France for the cavalry. But this hard fare keeps down the fiery spirit
of these stallion barbs, otherwise they would be unmanageable. When
turned out to grass, they soon become wild. Crossing a field one day,
mounted, I was set upon by a troop of these wild, grazing horses, and
was instantly knocked to the ground, where I lay stunned. A cavalry
officer, who was riding with me, had only just time to escape, and saved
himself by dismounting, and letting his horse go.

It was some hours before we could rescue the horses of our party from
their wild mates, sporting and bounding furiously over the plains. The
barb horses being all stallions (for the Moors consider it a crime to
geld so noble an animal), the fiercest and most terrific battles ensue
on a stud breaking loose from their pickets. These battles are always
between strangers, for the barb is the most affectionate of horses, and
if he is known to another, and become his mate, he will, as the Arabs
say, "die to be with him."

[18] These trained bands of negroes call themselves _Abeed-Sidi-Bokhari_,
from the patron saint whom they adopted on settling in Morocco, the
celebrated Sidi-Bokhari, commentator on the Koran, and a native of
Bokhara, as his name implies. His commentary is almost as much venerated
as the Koran itself.

[19] The _lex talion_ is frequently enforced in North Africa.

[20] Maroquine Moors drench you with tea! they guzzle sweet tea all day
long, as the Affghans gulp down their tea, with butter in it, from
morning to night.

[21] Native Jews manage most of the business of the interior, and farm
the greater part of the monopolies. But the Emperor must have some
European merchants connected with these Jews to maintain the commercial
relations of his country with Europe. The Jewish High Priest of Mogador
is a merchant, it being considered no interference with his sacred
functions.

[22] See Appendix at end of Vol. II.

[23] Muley Abd Errahman is averse to treating his governors with extreme
rigour. Mr. Hay gives an appalling account of private individuals
arrested on suspicion of possessing great wealth--"The most horrible
tortures are freely resorted to for forcing confessions of hidden
wealth. The victim is put in a slow oven, or kept standing for weeks in
a wooden dress; splinters are forced between the flesh and the nail of
the fingers; two fierce cats are put alive into his wide trousers, and
the breasts of his women are twisted with pincers. Young children have
sometimes been squeezed to death under the arms of a powerful man,
before the eyes of their parents."

A wealthy merchant at Tangier, whose _auri sacra fames_ had led him to
resist for a long time the cruel tortures that had been, employed
against him, yielded at length to the following trial. "He was placed in
a corner of the room, wherein a hungry lion was chained in such a manner
as to be able to reach him with his claws, unless he held himself in a
most unnatural position." This reads very much like a description of the
torments of the Inquisition. The Moors may have imported this system of
torture from Spain. Similar barbarities were said to have been inflicted
by King Otho on prisoners in Greece, even on British Ionian subjects! I
recollect particularly the sewing up of fierce cats in the petticoats of
women. My experience in Morocco does not permit me to authenticate Mr.
Hay's horrible picture.

[24] "To his Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Morocco, Sidi Muley Abd
Errahman.

"May it please your Majesty,

"A Society in England, having for its object the Abolition of Slavery
and the Slave Trade throughout the world, and denominated the British
and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, being informed of the pacific
intentions and friendly disposition of your Majesty towards our
Sovereign Queen and Government, and being informed likewise, that your
Majesty, in diplomatic relations with other Foreign Princes and States,
has universally manifested the greatest desire to preserve peace amongst
nations, and, of necessary consequence, the happiness of the human race,
are encouraged to approach your Majesty, and to plead on behalf of a
numerous and important class of your subjects, the negro and other black
slaves.

"These are a people always faithful to their friends and protectors (a
most conspicuous and immediate proof of which is seen in your Majesty's
Imperial Guard, formed principally of this class of your faithful
subjects,) and exhibiting under suffering and oppression the greatest
patience and fortitude, yet, during the long course of bygone centuries,
they have been subjected to horrid cruelties and barbarities, in order
to pander to the vices and to satiate the avarice of their oppressors.

"Now we, the Society in England aforesaid, address your Majesty for the
succour and protection of this cruelly oppressed portion of the human
race, and in order that you may be graciously pleased to remove the
chain of bondage from off these unfortunate victims of the violence and
cupidity of wicked men, who, in defiance of all justice and mercy, claim
them as their property, and buy and sell them as cattle.

"We further entreat that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to
place the slaves in your Imperial dominions upon a footing of equality
with the rest of your faithful subjects, and to make them free men,
having the rightful possession of their own persons, and being at
liberty to travel whithersoever they will.

"For your Majesty rightly understands and knows as well as we do, that
God the Almighty Maker of us and you, has made all men equal, and has
not permitted man to have property in his fellow man, which reduces them
to the level of brutes; therefore, to make slaves of our fellows, our
brothers and sisters, is to sin against the will and mind of God, and to
provoke his wrath and indignation against us, and against our children
after us.

"Consequently, we, the Society in England, aforesaid, in common with
some of your own Mussulman sovereigns and people, hold Slavery, and the
Slave Trade in extreme abhorrence, because it kills and destroys our
brothers whom we ought to love and cherish, because it makes them like
brutes, whom we ought to esteem as reasonable beings, because it hardens
our own hearts and makes us cruel towards our fellows, whom we ought to
treat with kindness and compassion, and because it deforms God's
creatures, in whom we ought to revere his spiritual likeness, man being
made after the likeness of God, in possessing a spiritual reasoning
soul; these evils, however, are the direct and inevitable consequences
of the accursed Slave Trade, and for such reasons we, the people of
England in general, abhor it, and seek, in every legitimate and
righteous way, to persuade men of every nation in the world to abandon
this inhuman and wicked traffic.

"Finally, we implore your Majesty to be pleased to follow out that great
act of confidence which you have exercised towards the negro race, in
appointing them the life-guards of your Imperial person, by graciously
liberating them from the cruel yoke of slavery. From our hearts we
believe that your Majesty will find such a spontaneous act of compassion
towards the desolate African Slaves to be the wisest worldly policy, and
most agreeable to the will of the Eternal Creator of us all. Your loyal
subjects will love the goodness of your heart the more, and serve you
the better, while all Africa, of which the immense dominions of your
Majesty form so large a part, will catch new life and vigour, under the
blessing of the Almighty, and grow happy and prosperous in the ages to
come.

"Signed and sealed on behalf of the Society in England for abolishing
Slavery and the Slave Trade throughout the world.

"(Signed) THOMAS CLARKSON. (L.S.)"

[25] This is not exact. The vizier is often the author of certain lines
of policy.

[26] All the Moorish Sultans are spoken of by the people as _Seedna_,
"Our Lord," and departed Saints are addressed by the same title.

[27] It is curious to see the Spartan principle of theft developing
itself under such different circumstances.

[28] [Transcriber's Note: In our print copy, the text of this footnote
is missing.]

[29] This is the old story of the abettors of the slave-trade in all
parts of the world; I very much doubt if there be any truth in it. None
of the slave-dealers of the Desert whom I conversed with, had ever seen
or heard of prisoners of war being put to death.

[30] The European name of Mogador, is supposed to be derived from
Mugdul, or Modogul, a Moorish Saiut.

[31] The Governor of Mogador told me to go to look at his slaves, and
see that they were well fed and well clothed. But every rich man's
horses and dogs are well-fed and well-housed.

[32] Mr. Davidson did not visit Morocco as an abolitionist. Head what
impression this Maroquine slavery made upon his mind. "My heart sickens
at the sight of this horrid picture. In another lot of these unfortunate
beings were six women, one of whom had given birth to a child on the
road, which was thrown into the bargain. There was an old wretch who had
come from Saweirah to purchase female slaves; his examination was
carried on in the most disgusting manner, I could not refrain from
calling down the curse of Heaven on these inhuman wretches. In many, but
little feeling is shewn for the poor blacks; and they seemed to think
less of their own fate than I did, who was merely a looker-on. One poor
creature, however, who was a finer woman, and less black than the rest,
shed tears. I could have given her my dagger to have plunged it in the
breast of the villain who was examining her. And yet these people pray
four times a day, and think themselves superior to all God's creatures!
More than ever do I wish to get away from, this den of hell-hounds. Each
of the grown persons was in the prime of life, and had once a home, and
was more to be pitied than the children, who had never known the liberty
of thought and act. To each of the ten slaves was given a lunch of bread;
while both the inhuman buyers and sellers, after chuckling over their
bargains, went to offer up their prayers to Heaven, before they took
their daily meal. Can such unhallowed doings be permitted to endure
longer! Oh, Spirit of Civilization, hither turn your eyes, and punish
the purchasers who ought to know better, for thus only will the sale be
stopped."

[33] I asked a Moor, "Who built this castle on the sands?" He replied
pertly, "Iskander!" Whenever the Moors see anything marvellous or
ancient, they ascribe it to Alexander the Great, to Pharaoh, to Solomon,
or even to Nimrod, as caprice leads them, believing that these three or
four personages created all the wondrous and monstrous things in the
world. But we have an instance here, how soon through ignorance, or the
want of records, a modern thing may become ancient in the minds of the
vulgar. This fort was built after Mogador, which town is not yet a
century old.

[34] Certainly, to establish relations with the Southern provinces of
Morocco, that is, Sous and Wadnoun, would greatly injure the trade of
Mogador, and, therefore, the Consuls, as well as the Moorish
Authorities, set their faces against any direct intercourse being opened
with the South.

[35] Graeberg says Noun means the "river of eels," Davidson derives the
name from a Portuguese queen called Nounah; but his editor says the name
is properly Nul, was so written when the Arabs possessed Portugal, and
that Queen Nunah is a modern invention.

[36] Whatever may have been Mr. Davidson's faults, I scarcely doubt that
the first impressions of Mr. Consul-General Hay were correct. He says,
"I _fear, however, that I am not to expect much assistance from him_,"
(Mr. Hay); and hints, in other parts of his Journal, that Mr. Hay was
rather disposed to throw difficulties in his way, than to render him
efficient aid. Mr. Hay's son (which is very natural) attempts to
exculpate his father in an appendix to his "Western Barbary," and some
will, perhaps, think he has done so successfully. My experience of the
diplomatic skill of the late Consul, does not permit me to coincide with
this favourable opinion. The greater probability is, that if Mr.
Davidson had been left to his own "inspirations," and allowed complete
liberty of action, he would have succeeded in reaching Timbuctoo; but
his health doss not appear to have been sufficiently robust, or himself
acclimated, to have brought him back from his perilous adventure.

[37] These cups hold at least a pint each, and every adult male is
expected to empty four, if not six. Of course, they get beastly
intoxicated, and suffer a day or two of illness afterwards, a very just
punishment.

[38] But I do not think it reaches the point of complaisance, noticed by
Monsieur Chenier, when he was French Consul in 1767. He says, "The
veneration of the Moors is so great for this Prince, that they deem
themselves happy whenever one; of their daughters is admitted to share
his couch." On the other hand, many of the beauties presented by the
Sultan to his ministers, although brought out of his harems, are
virgins. The poor ladies in the royal harems are only so much stock,
from which their Lord and tyrant picks and chooses.

[39] Friend Phillips is always wrestling with these prejudices of
Barbary Jews. When his wife was delivered of a daughter, he was
determined to have as much "fuss" made of the child as if it had been a
son, to spite the prejudices of his brethren. So, when he went out for a
walk with his wife, he would walk always arm-in-arm with her, although
she was a Jewess of this country, which caused great annoyance to his
woman-oppressing brethren.




[Transcriber's Notes: In this electronic edition, footnotes have been
numbered and relocated to the end of the work. In footnote 35, the
spellings Nouna and Nunah both occur. In chapter 6, the word "convey"
was corrected to "conveying."]





End of Project Gutenberg's Travels in Morocco, Vol. 1., by James Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS IN MOROCCO, VOL. 1. ***

***** This file should be named 10355.txt or 10355.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/3/5/10355/

Produced by Carlo Traverso, Tom Allen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team from images generously made available
by the Bibliotheque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


