The Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoir and Diary of John Yeardley, Minister
of the Gospel, by John Yeardley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Memoir and Diary of John Yeardley, Minister of the Gospel

Author: John Yeardley

Release Date: December 2, 2003 [EBook #10369]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN YEARDLEY ***




Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Sheila Vogtmann and PG Distributed
Proofreaders





MEMOIR AND DIARY

OF
JOHN YEARDLEY,

Minister of the Gospel.


EDITED BY CHARLES TYLOR.

"Should time with me now close, I die in peace with my God, and in that
love for mankind which believes 'every nation to be our nation, and every
man our brother.'"--_Diary of J. Yeardley._.

PHILADELPHIA:
HENRY LONGSTRETH,
1336 CHESTNUT STREET.
1860.

CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

FROM JOHN YEARDLEY'S CONVERSION TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS PUBLIC
MINISTRY, 1803-15.

Birth and occupation
Joseph Wood, of Newhouse
Anecdote of Thomas Yeardley
John Yeardley's conversion
He enters T. D. Walton's linen warehouse
Joins the Society of Friends
Marriage with Elizabeth Dunn--Commencement of his Diary
A. Clarke's "Commentary"
Enters into business on his own account
Visit of Sarah Lameley
Call to the ministry


CHAPTER II.

FROM HIS ENTRANCE ON THE MINISTRY IN 1815, TO HIS COMMISSION TO RESIDE IN
GERMANY IN 1820.

First offerings in the ministry
Is unsuccessful in business
Removes to Bentham
His views on the Christian ministry
Visit of Hannah Field
Is recorded a minister
Visits Kendal and Lancaster, in company with Joseph Wood
Visit to Friends at Barnsley
Journey to York
Letters to Thomas Yeardley


CHAPTER III.


FROM HIS COMMISSION TO RESIDE ABROAD IN 1820, TO HIS REMOVAL TO GERMANY
IN 1822.

Prospect of residing in Germany
Visit from John Kirkham
Liverpool Quarterly Meeting
Public meeting at Wray
Visit of Ann Jones
Journey to Leeds
Death of Joseph Wood
Illness of Elizabeth Yeardley
Her death
John Yeardley goes to Hull
Extracts from Elizabeth Yeardley's letters
Testimony concerning Joseph Wood


CHAPTER IV.

HIS FIRST RESIDENCE IN GERMANY, 1822-24.

Sails to Hamburg--His lodging at Eppendorf
Arrives at Pyrmont
Friedensthal
Religious service with Thomas Shillitoe
Establishment of the Reading and Youths' meetings at Pyrmont
Mode of bleaching
Visiters at the Baths attend Pyrmont meeting
J.Y. visits Minden and Eidinghausen
Plan for helping the Friends of Minden
Journey to Leipzig
Returns to England


CHAPTER V.

FROM HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND IN 1824, TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS FIRST
CONTINENTAL JOURNEY IN 1825.

Mental depression
Journey with Elizabeth H. Walker through the Midland Counties
Yearly Meeting
Returns to Friedensthal
Humiliation
Certificate for the South of France
Martha Savory's visit to the Continent
Journey to Rotterdam


Chapter VI.

HIS FIRST CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1825-26.

John Yeardley and his companions leave Pyrmont
Visit Elberfeld, Creveldt, Muehlheim, &c.
Neuwied--the Inspirirten
Journey to Berlenburg
Are placed under arrest at Erndebrueck
Set at liberty by the Landrath of Berlenburg
The Old and New Separatists
Gelnhausen and Raneberg
Pforzheim--H. Kienlin
Stuttgardt, Basle, &c.
Zurich--the Gessner family
Berne
Geneva
Journey to Congenies
Religious service in the South of France
St. Etienne
Return to England


CHAPTER VII.

HIS MARRIAGE WITH MARTHA SAVORY, 1826-27.

John Yeardley goes into Yorkshire
Death of his parents
Marriage with Martha Savory
Biographical notice of Martha Savory
Letter from Martha Yeardley
J. and M. Y. take up their abode at Burton, near Barnsley


CHAPTER VIII.

THE SECOND CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1827-28.

PART I.--GERMANY.

J. and M.Y. sail to Rotterdam
Minden, &c.
Journey to the shores of the North Sea
Visit to the colonists on the _Grodens_
Fredericks-Oort
Frankfort
Darmstadt--Durkheim
Stuttgart
Kornthal
Wilhelmsdorf


CHAPTER IX.

THE SECOND CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1827-28.

PART II.--SWITZERLAND.

Schaffhausen
Beuggen
Zurich
Hofwyl--Geneva--A. Bost
Lausanne
Neufchatel
Berne and the neighborhood
Montmirail--Neufchatel
Locle--Mary Anne Calame
Journey through France
Guernsey--Accident on the water


CHAPTER X.

HOME OCCUPATIONS AND TRAVELS IN ENGLAND AND WALES, 1828-33.

Illness of Martha Yeardley
Letter from M.A. Calame
Yearly Meeting
Letter from Auguste Borel--Public meetings in Yorkshire
Death of James A. Wilson--Journey through the Western Counties
Various religious engagements
Journey through Wales with Elizabeth Dudley
Visit to Lancashire
Removal to Scarborough
Establishment of a Bible-class at ditto
Prospects of a journey to Greece
Argyri Climi
Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders


CHAPTER XI.

THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, OR THE JOURNEY TO GREECE, 1833-34.

PART I.--THE JOURNEY TO ANCONA.


Paris
Death of Rachel Waterhouse
Nancy
Phalsbourg--Strasburg--Pastor Majors
Ban de la Roche
Basle
Neufchatel
Polish Count and Countess
Geneva
Journey through Italy
Letters from Friends in England


CHAPTER XII.

THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1833-34.

PART II.--GREECE.

Corfu
Count F. Sardina
Santa Maura
Wigwam village on the mainland
Cephalonia--Zante
Patras--the Gulf of Corinth
Galaxidi--Trying situation
Castri (the ancient Delphi)
Journey to Athens
Athens
Corinth
Detentions--Vostizza
Patras
Corfu


CHAPTER XIII.

THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1833-34.

PART III.--THE RETURN FROM GREECE.

Letters from John Rowntree and William Allen
Ancona
Florence
The Custom-house--Piedmont
Geneva
Lausanne
Berne
Zurich--Schaffhausen
Basle--Death of Thomas Yeardley
Death of M.A. Calame
Neufchatel
Return to England--Death of A.B. Savory


CHAPTER XIV.

FROM THE END OF THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY IN 1834 TO THE COMMENCEMENT
OF THE FOURTH IN 1842.

Divisions in the Society of Friends
Employment of leisure time
Girls' Lancasterian school at Scarborough
Death of Elizabeth Rowntree--Letter from M.Y. to Elizabeth Dudley
Visit to Thame
Visit to Lancashire
Visits to the Isle of Wight
Death of John Rutter
Prospect of revisiting the Continent


CHAPTER XV.

THE FOURTH CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1842-43.

Amiens
Paris
Letters from E. Dudley and J. Rowntree
Lyons
Nismes--Boarding-school for girls
Letter from John Rowntree
Montpelier
Lesengnan
Maux
Saverdun
Toulouse
Montauban--Castres
Tullins--Grenoble
Geneva
Lausanne
Neufchatel--Paul Petavel
Locle
Berne
Basle
Carlsruhe--Frankfort
Accident to J.Y.--Vlotho


CHAPTER XVI.

REMOVAL TO STAMFORD-HILL, AND COMMENCEMENT OF THE FIFTH CONTINENTAL
JOURNEY, 1843-48.

Removal to Berkhamstead
Removal to Stamford-hill
Visit to the families of Gracechurch-St. Monthly Meeting
Death of J.J. Gurney and I. Stickney
Prepare for revisiting the Continent
Brussels
H. Van Maasdyk
Charleroi--Spa
Bonn
Mannheim, Strasburg
Basle
Berne-Neufchatel
Grenoble
Privas--Vals
Nismes--Congenies


CHAPTER XVII.

COMPLETION OF THE FIFTH CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, 1849-50.

Letter from J.Y. to John Kitching
Elberfeld--Muehlheim
Bonn
Kreuznach--J.A. Ott
Mannheim
Stuttgardt--Death of Elizabeth Dudley
Kornthal
Kreuznach
Bonn
Return home--Resume their journey
Berlin--A. Beyerhaus
Warmbrunn
Illness of Martha Yeardley-Toeplitz
Prague--Translation of tracts into the Bohemian language
Kreuzuach--Neuwied


CHAPTER XVIII.

DEATH OF MARTHA YEARDLEY, AND JOHN YEARDLEY'S JOURNEY TO
NORWAY, 1851-52.

Illness and death of Martha Yeardley
J.Y. visits Ireland
Prospect of a journey to Norway
Homburg--Illness of J.Y.
Christiana--Christiansand
Stavanger
Excursion up one of the fiords
Bergen
Meetings at Foedde and other places
Obernkirchen


CHAPTER XIX.

HIS JOURNEY TO SOUTH RUSSIA, 1853.

Passport--Sails from Hull
Petersburg
Moscow
Journey to Iekaterinoslav
Kharkov
Rybalsk--The German Colonies
The Molokans
The Crimea--The Tartars
A suspicious halting-place--Simpheropol
Feodosia
Odessa--Constantinople
Smyrna
Syra--Malta
Nismes--Bagneres de Bigorre
Pialoux


CHAPTER XX.

FROM HIS RETURN FROM RUSSIA TO HIS LAST JOURNEY, 1853-1858.

Visits Bath
The Yearly Meeting--Life of J. J. Gurney
Visit to Minden--Religious service in Yorkshire
Goes again to Minden
Neuveville
Paris
Visit to Bristol and Gloucester Quarterly Meetings
Minden
Visit to Birmingham, Leicester, &c.
Goes to Nismes
Visits Chelmsford, &c.


CHAPTER XXI.

LAST JOURNEY AND DEATH, 1858. CONCLUDING REMARKS.

Religious Mission to Asiatic Turkey
Voyage to Constantinople
Sun-stroke
Meetings in the neighborhood of Constantinople
Is seized with paralysis, and returns home
His death--Remarks on his character
Notes of some of his public testimonies



MEMOIR

OF

JOHN YEARDLEY.




CHAPTER I.


FROM JOHN YEARDLEY's CONVERSION TO THE COMMENCEMENT
OF HIS PUBLIC MINISTRY.

1803--1815.

John Yeardley was born on the 3rd of the First Month, 1786, at a small
farm-house beside Orgreave Hall, in the valley of the Rother, four miles
south of Rotherham. His parents, Joel and Frances Yeardley, farmed some
land, chiefly pasture, and his mother is said to have been famous for her
cream-cheeses, which she carried herself to Sheffield market. She was a
pious and industrious woman; but, through the misconduct of her husband,
was sometimes reduced to such straits as scarcely to have enough food for
her children.

Before they left Orgreave they were attracted towards the worship of
Friends, and several of the family, including two of Joel Yeardley's
sisters, embraced the truth as held by the Society. In the year 1802 they
removed to a farm at Blacker, three miles south of Barnsley, and attended
the meeting at Monk Bretton, or Burton, near that town, where the
meeting-house then stood. At Blacker it was John's business to ride into
Barnsley daily on a pony, with two barrels of milk to distribute to the
customers of his mother's dairy. His elder brother Thomas worked on the
farm.

Their attendance at Burton meeting brought the family under the notice of
Joseph Wood, a minister of the Society, residing at Newhouse, near
Highflatts, four miles from Penistone. Joseph Wood had been a Yorkshire
clothier, but relinquished business in the prime of life, and spent the
rest of his days in assiduous pastoral labor of a kind of which we have
few examples. To attend a Monthly Meeting he would leave home on foot the
Seventh-day before, with John Bottomley, also a Friend and preacher, and
at one time his servant, for some neighboring meeting. He would occupy the
evening with social calls, dropping at every house the word of exhortation
or comfort. The meeting next day would witness his fervent ministry. In
the afternoon they would proceed to the place where the Monthly Meeting
was to be held the following day, which they would attend, filling up the
time before and after with social and religious visits. In the intervals
of the Monthly Meetings, when not engaged on more distant service, it was
his practice to appoint meetings for worship in the villages around
Highflatts, and very frequently to visit those places where individuals
were "under convincement," particularly Barnsley and Dewsbury, where at
that time many were added to the Society. On his return home from these
services he would spend the day in an upper room, without a fire, even in
the severest weather, writing a minute account of all that had happened.

It was in 1803 that Joseph Wood first had intercourse with Joel Yeardley's
family. Under date of the 19th of the Fourth Month, he says, speaking of
himself and some other concerned Friends:--


We felt an inclination to visit Joel Yeardley's family, who are under
convincement, and who have lately removed from near Handsworth Woodhouse.
We went to breakfast. He and Frances his wife, with Thomas and John their
sons, the former about nineteen, the latter seventeen years of age,
received us in a very kind and affectionate manner, expressing their
satisfaction at our coming to see them. They appeared quite open, and gave
us a particular account of the manner of their convincement and beginning
to attend Friends' meetings, which was about four years ago. I believe
there is a good degree of sincerity in the man and his wife, and the two
sons appear to be tender and hopeful.


The next month Joseph Wood repeated his visit, and gives an account of the
interview in the following words:--


5 _mo_., 1803.--Having ever since I was at Joel Yeardley's the last
month, felt my mind drawn to sit with the family, and this appearing to me
to be the right time, I set out from home the 14th of the Fifth Month, in
company with John Bottomley. Got to Joel Yeardley's betwixt four and five
o'clock. After tea, Thomas Dixon Walton and Samuel Coward of Barnsley came
to meet us there. In the evening we had a precious opportunity together,
in which caution, counsel, advice, and encouragement flowed plentifully,
suited to the varied states of the family. I had a long time therein
first, from 1 Cor. xv. 58; John Bottomley next. Afterwards I had a pretty
long time, after which J.B. was concerned in prayer. At the breaking up of
the opportunity I had something very encouraging to communicate to their
son Thomas, who, I believe, is an exercised youth, to whom my spirit felt
very nearly united.


Joel Yeardley unhappily did not long remain faithful to his convictions.
He not only himself drew back from intercourse with Friends, but was
unwilling his sons should leave their work to attend week-day meetings,
and did all in his power to prevent them. This is shown by the following
narrative from Joseph Wood's memoranda:--


As William Wass and I were going to attend a Committee at Highflatts, on
our Monthly Meeting day, in the morning, we met with Thomas Yeardley of
Blacker, near Worsbro', a young man who is under convincement. I was a
little surprised to see him having on a green singlet and smock frock. He
burst out into tears; I inquired the matter, and if something was amiss at
home; he only replied, "Not much;" and we not having time to atop,
proceeded, and he went forward to my house. This was on the 19th of the
Ninth Month, 1803.

After the Monthly Meeting was over, I had an opportunity to inquire into
the cause of his appearance and trouble, and found that he was religiously
concerned to attend weekday meetings, which his father was much averse to;
and in order to procure his liberty he had worked almost beyond his
ability; but all would not do, his father plainly telling him that he
should quit the house. The evening before, he applied to him for leave to
come to the meeting at Highflatts to-day; but he refused, and treated him
with very rough language. However, as the concern remained with him, he
rose early in the morning and got himself ready; but his father came and
violently pulled the clothes off his back, and his shirt also, and took
all his other clothes from him but those we met him in, telling him to get
a place immediately, for he should not stop in his house. Being thus
stripped, he went to his work in the stable; but, not feeling easy without
coming to meeting, he set out as he was, not minding his dress, so that he
might but be favored to get to the meeting.

This evening we had an opportunity with him in my parlor, much to our
satisfaction. The language of encouragement and consolation flowed freely
and plentifully towards him through William Wass, John Bottomley, and
myself; and afterwards, in conference with him, we found liberty to advise
him to return home (he having before thought of procuring a place),
believing if he was preserved faithful, way would in time be made for him,
and that it might perhaps be a means of his father's restoration; as at
times, he said, he appeared a little different, not having wholly lost his
love to Friends, and always behaved kindly to them. He took our advice
kindly, and complied therewith. After stopping two nights at my house, he
returned home.


Joseph Wood did not suffer much time to elapse before he paid another
visit to Blacker, to comfort the afflicted family. It was from this visit,
as we apprehend, that John Yeardley dated his change of heart. "I was
convinced," he said on one occasion, "at a meeting which Joseph Wood had
with our family."


7 _mo_. 17, 1803.--Thomas Walker Haigh and William Gant accompanied
us to Joel Yeardley's, where we tarried all night; but the two young men
from Barnsley returned home after supper. Joel was from home, but after
tea we had a religious opportunity with the rest of the family, in which I
had a very long consolatory and encouraging testimony to bear to the
deeply-suffering exercised minds from John xvi. 33. Afterwards I had a
pretty long time, principally to their son John, who I believe was under a
precious visitation from on high. He was much broken and tendered, and I
hope this season of remarkable favor will not soon be forgotten by him.


On his return home Joseph Wood wrote him the following letter:--


Newhouse, 10 mo. 24, 1803

BELOVED FRIEND, JOHN YEARDLEY,

Thou hast often been in my remembrance since I last saw thee, accompanied
with an earnest desire that the seed sown may prosper and bring forth
fruit in its season, to the praise and glory of the Great Husbandman, who,
I believe, is calling thee to glory, honor, immortality, and eternal life.
And O mayest thou be willing in this the day of his power to leave all and
follow him who hath declared, "Every one who hath forsaken houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundred-fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life."

Not that we should be found wanting in our duty to our near connexions,
for true religion does not destroy natural affection, but brings and
preserves it in its proper place. When our earthly parents command one
thing, and the Almighty another, it is better for us to obey God than man,
and herein is our love manifested unto him by our obedience to his
commands though it may sometimes clash against our parents' minds. At the
same time it is our duty to endeavor to convince them, that we are willing
to obey all their lawful commands, where they do not interfere with our
duty to Him who hath given us life, breath, and being, and mercifully
visited us by his grace. I thought a remark of this kind appeared to be
required of me, apprehending if thou art faithful unto the Lord, thou wilt
find it to be thy duty at times to leave thy worldly concerns to attend
religious meetings, which may cause thee deep and heavy trials; but
remember for thy encouragement, the promise of the hundred-fold in this
world, and in that which is to come, eternal life.

Thou art favored with a pious though afflicted mother, and a
religiously-exercised elder brother, who, I doubt not, will rejoice to see
thee grow in the truth. May you all be blessed with the blessing of
preservation, and strengthened to keep your ranks in righteousness, and
may you be a strength and comfort to each other, and hold up a standard of
truth and righteousness in the neighborhood where your lot is cast. Do not
flinch, my beloved friend; be not ashamed to become a true follower of
Christ. When little things are required of thee, be faithful; thus shalt
thou be made ruler over more; when greater things are manifested to be thy
duty, remember the Lord is able to support, who declared by the mouth of
his prophet formerly, "Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the
birds round about are against her." But if the Lord be on our side, it
matters little who may be permitted to arise against us, for his power is
above all the combined powers of the wicked one, and he will bless and
preserve those who above all things are concerned to serve him faithfully,
which that thou mayest be is the sincere desire of thy truly loving and
affectionate friend,

JOSEPH WOOD.


The word which had been so fitly spoken took deep root in John Yeardley's
heart, and on the following New-year's day he went up to Newhouse to
converse with his experienced and sympathizing friend.


On the 1st of the First Month, 1804, (writes Joseph Wood,) John Yeardley
came to my house, on purpose to see me. He got here betwixt ten and eleven
o'clock in the forenoon, attended our meeting and tarried with us until
after tea, and then returned home. He is a hopeful youth, tender in
spirit, and of a sweet natural disposition; was convinced of the truth in
an opportunity I had at his father's house, and, I hope, is likely to do
well. I love him much, and much desire his preservation, growth, and
establishment upon the everlasting foundation, against which the gates of
Hell are not able to prevail.


Shortly after this, we obtain from John Yeardley's own hand an insight
into the depth of those religious convictions which had so mercifully been
vouchsafed to him. The manner in which this interesting memorandum
concludes is quaint, but it expresses a resolution to which he was enabled
to adhere in a remarkable degree throughout the course of his long life;
for of him it may be said that, beyond many, his pursuits, his aims, and
his conversation were not of the world, but were bounded by the line of
the Gospel, and animated by its self-denying spirit.


_Blacker_, 2 _mo_. 9, 1804.--As I pursued these earthly
enjoyments, it pleased the Lord, in the riches of his mercy to turn me
back in the blooming of my youth, and favor me with the overshadowing of
his love, to see the splendid pleasures that so easily detained my
precious time. He was graciously pleased to call me to the exercise of
that important work which must be done in all our hearts, which appears to
me no small cross to my own will, and attended with many discouragements;
yet I am made to believe it is the way wherein I ought to go; and I trust
Thou, O Lord, who hast called, will enable me to give up, and come forward
in perfect obedience to the manifestations of thy divine light, so as a
thorough change may be wrought, that I may be fitted and prepared for a
place in thy everlasting kingdom. Though at times I am led into great
discouragement, and almost ready to faint by the way, fearing I shall
never be made conqueror over those potent enemies who so much oppose my
happiness, O be Thou near in these needful times, and underneath to bear
me up in all the difficulties which it is necessary I should pass through
for my further refinement, whilst I have a being in this earthly
pilgrimage. Strong are the ties that seem to attach me to the earth; but
O! I have cause to believe, from a known sense, stronger are the ties of
thy overshadowing Spirit than all the ties of natural affection. Great and
frequent are the trials and temptations, and narrow is the way wherein we
ought to walk; alas! too narrow for many. O may I ever be preserved,
faithfully forward to the eternal land of rest!

Dear Lord, who knowest the secret of all hearts, thou knowest I am at
times under a sense of great weakness; but thou, who art always waiting to
gather the tender youth into thy flock and family, hast mercifully reached
over me with thy gathering arm. Mayst thou ever be near to strengthen me
in every weakness; and make me willing to leave all, take up my daily
cross, and follow thee in the denial of self, not fearing to confess thee
before men. Always give me strength to perform whatsoever thou mayest
require at my hands; wean my affections more and more; attract me nearer
to thyself; and lead me through this world as a stranger, never to be
known to it more but by the name of JOHN YEARDLEY.


In the Third Month Joseph Wood again addressed his young friend by letter,
encouraging him to be steadfast in trial, and to beware of the gilded
baits of the enemy; and promising him, that if he followed the Lord
faithfully, his works should appear marvellous in his eyes, his wonders be
disclosed to him in the deeps, and he on his part would be made willing to
serve him with a perfect heart.

In the Sixth Month, again visiting Blacker, he had a "precious,
heart-tendering religious opportunity with all the family."

About this time Joel Yeardley was so much reduced in his circumstances as
to be obliged to give up farming, which compelled his sons to seek their
own means of livelihood. Thomas and John went into Barnsley, where they
applied themselves to the linen manufacture, and were taken into the
warehouse of Thomas Dixon Walton, a Friend, who afterwards married a
daughter of Thomas Shillitoe.

In the First Month, 1806, Joseph Wood records another interesting
interview with his young friend:--


1 _mo_. 7.--I called on Thomas Dixon Walton and John Yeardley, with
whom I had a religious opportunity in which the language of encouragement
flowed freely; I being opened unto them from Luke xii. 32; "Fear not,
little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
kingdom."


In the Third Month of this year John Yeardley made application for
membership in the Society of Friends, and was admitted in the Fifth Month
following, being then twenty years of age. His brother Thomas had joined
the Society some time before. The brothers are thus described by one who
knew them intimately:--Thomas, as a man of homely manners, of hearty and
genial character, and greatly beloved; John, as possessing a native
refinement which made it easy for him in after-life to rise in social
position, but whose reserved habits caused him to be less generally
appreciated.

The call which John Yeardley received, and which he so happily obeyed, to
leave the world and enter by the strait gate into the kingdom of heaven,
was accompanied, as we shall afterwards see more fully, by a secret
conviction that he would one day have publicly to preach to others the
Gospel of salvation. A sense that such was the case seems to have taken
hold of Joseph Wood's mind, in a visit which he made him some time after
his admission into the Society.


1 _mo_. 29, 1808.--Sat with T.D. Walton and his wife, and his man
John Yeardley. I had two pretty long testimonies to bear from Colossians
iv. 17. I had to show the necessity there was for those who had received a
gift in the ministry to be faithful, and, as Satan was as busy about these
as any others, to be careful to withstand his temptations, that nothing
might hinder our fulfilment of this gift, nor anything be suffered to
prevail over us that might hinder its proper effect upon others.

After Thomas was gone to breakfast, my mind was unexpectedly opened in a
pretty long encouraging testimony to John, from John xxi. 22--"What is
that to thee? follow thou me;" having gently to caution him not to look at
others to his hurt, but faithfully follow his Master, Jesus Christ, in the
way of his leadings.


In 1809 John Yeardley married Elizabeth Dunn. She was much older than
himself, "plain in person," but "full of simplicity and goodness," and of
a "most lovable" character. Like her husband she had come into the Society
by convincement; and like him she had partaken in a large degree of the
paternal sympathy and oversight of Joseph Wood. She had been a Methodist,
and was one of the first who joined with Friends at Barnsley in the
awakening which took place there in the beginning of the century.

John Yeardley and his wife inhabited, on their marriage, a small house at
the southern extremity of the town, whither very soon afterwards was
transferred the afternoon meeting which it was customary to hold at some
Friend's house in Barnsley. The morning meeting continued to be held at.
Burton until 1816, when a new meeting-house was built in the town.

They had only one child, a son, who died in infancy.

John Yeardley commenced his Diary in 1811; and this valuable record of his
religious experience, and of his travels in the service of the Gospel, was
maintained with more or less regularity to the end of his life. The motive
which induced him to adopt this practice is given in the following lines,
with which the manuscript commences:--


It may seem a little strange that I should, in my present situation,
attempt to keep any memorandums of the following kind; but feeling
desirous simply to pen down a few broken remarks as they may at times
occur to my mind, I apprehend no great harm can arise; and if, by causing
a closer scrutiny into my future stepping along, they should in any degree
exercise my mind to spiritual improvement, the intended purpose will be
fully answered.


The first entry is dated the 6th of the Tenth Month, 1811:--


_First-day_.--Have been sweetly refreshed at our little meeting this
morning. I have long felt assured that Time calls for greater diligence in
me than has hitherto been rendered. And when I consider the innumerable
favors and privileges which I enjoy at the hands of Divine Providence,
beyond many of my fellow-creatures, and the few returns of gratitude I am
making, it raises in me an inexpressible desire that my few remaining days
may be dedicated, in humble obedience, to Him whose great and noble cause
I am professing to promote.

How unstable is human nature! On sitting down in meeting this evening I
got into a state of unwatchfulness, which continued so long as to deprive
me of the refreshment my poor mind so often stands in need of.


In the entries which follow, the progress of the inward work and the
preparation for future service are very evident:--


13_th_.--Went to our morning gathering in a low frame of mind, and
was made afresh to believe that were we more concerned to dwell nearer the
pure principle of Truth when out of meetings, we should not find such
difficult access when thus collected, but each one would be encouraged to
come under the precious influence of that baptizing power which would
cement and refresh our spirits together. O then, I firmly believe, our
Heavenly Father would in an eminent manner condescend to crown our
assemblies with the overshadowing of his love, and enable us not only to
roll away the stone, but to draw living water as out of the wells of
salvation.

17_th_.--"Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
within me," was a language which secretly passed my mind in meeting this
morning; and though inwardly poor as I am, yet I dare not but acknowledge
it a privilege to be favored even with a good desire.

24_th_.--Was a little refreshed at our morning gathering, my spirit
being exercised under a concern that I might not rest satisfied with
anything short of living experience; and I felt comforted with a lively
hope that He whom my soul loveth will not fail to manifest his divine
regard to one who is sincerely desirous to become acquainted with his
ways. O, how shall I render sufficient thankfulness for such a favor, thus
to be made once more sweetly to partake of the brook by the way.

Thought the evening sitting rather dull, though the ministry of T. S. was
lively, which is a confirming proof that however favored we may be at
certain seasons, yet if at any time we suffer our attention to be diverted
from the real object, it frustrates the design of Him who I believe
intends that we should wait together to renew our strength.


In the Eleventh Month Henry Hull, from the United Slates, accompanied by
John Hull of Uxbridge, visited Burton, and had good service their, both
amongst Friends and with the public. They lodged at John Yeardley's, and,
in describing their labors and the pleasure he derived from their society,
he records his thankfulness at being placed in a situation in life such as
afforded him the opportunity of entertaining the Lord's servants.

His disposition was lively and strongly inclined to humor, and he early
felt the necessity of having this natural trait of character subjected to
the rule of heavenly wisdom. Under date 27th of the Eleventh Month he
says:--


I feel a little compunction for having these few days past given way too
much to the lightness of my disposition, and not being sufficiently
concerned to seek after that stability and serious reflection which never
fails to improve the mind.


On the 26th of the Twelfth Month he records a state of spiritual poverty.


Such, he says, has been the instability of my mind, that my "Beloved is
unto me as a fountain sealed." But, he adds, I feel a little tendered this
evening, on reading over a few comfortable expressions in a letter from my
friend, Joseph Wood.


This condition of mind continued for some months, when he thus breaks
forth:--


3 _mo_. 8, 1812.--How pleasant it is once more to be favored with a
few drops of living water from the springs of that well which my soul has
had for many weeks past to languish after, and which I trust has been
wisely withheld in order to show me that, although it is our indispensable
duty to persevere in digging for it, yet it is only in His own time that
we are permitted to drink thereof.


His just appreciation of the nature of meetings held for the discipline of
the Church, and of the spirit in which they are to be conducted, is shown
in an early part of the Diary.


3 _mo_. 15.--Was at our Preparative Meeting. The queries having to be
answered, I was led into deep thoughtfulness respecting the same, and
inwardly solicited that the Father of mercies would lend his divine aid,
in the performance of such important duties; which I have reason to
believe was in some measure answered, for they were gone through with a
degree of ease and comfort to my own mind. May I ever keep in remembrance
the testimonies of his love which are so often manifested!

8 _mo_. 17.--Meeting for discipline at Burton. The forepart was
conducted, I think, to edification; but in the latter, one subject
occupied much time unnecessarily, and did not conclude to general
satisfaction. When some whose spirits are not well seasoned, speak to
circumstances which they may not have sufficiently considered, it
sometimes does more harm than they may at first apprehend.


The entries in the Diary at this time shew many alternations of
discouragement and comfort, and of that deep searching of his own heart
from which he seldom shrank, and which is the only way to the liberty and
peace of the soul.


4 _mo_. 12.--In contemplating the gracious dealings of the Almighty
with me from time to time, I have been led to query, Is it not that I
might, by patiently submitting to the turnings and overturnings of his
most holy hand, become fashioned to show forth his praise? But alas! where
are the fruits? Is not the work rather marring as on the wheel; can I, in
sincerity say, I am the clay, Thou art the potter? I feel weary of my own
negligence; for it seems as if the day with me was advancing faster than
the work, I fear lest I should be cast off for want of giving greater
diligence to make my calling sure. O may he who is perfect in wisdom
strengthen the feeble desire which remains, and melt my stubborn will into
perfect obedience by the operation of his pure spirit.


In the next memoranda which we shall transcribe we see when and how his
mind was imbued with the love of Scriptural inquiry and illustration. Two
or three good books well read and digested in younger life often form the
thinking habits of the man, and supply no small part of the substance, or
at any rate the nucleus, of his knowledge. This shows the vast importance
of a wise choice of authors, at the time when the mind is the most
susceptible of impressions, and the most capable of appropriating the food
which is presented to it. Those who knew John Yeardley will recognise the
intimate connexion between these early studies and the character of his
future life and ministry. If any should think his language on this or
kindred subjects marked by excessive caution, they must bear in mind the
comparative by unintellectual circle in which he moved.


I trust, he writes, under date of 4 mo. 28, a few of my leisure hours for
two or three weeks past have been spent profitably in perusing some of A.
Clarke's Notes on the Book of Genesis; and although I am fully aware that
the greatest caution is necessary, when these learned men undertake to
exercise their skill on the sacred text, yet I am of opinion, if used with
prudence and a right spirit attended to, it may tend considerably to
illustrate particular passages. I think this pious man has not only shown
his profound knowledge of the learned languages, but some of his
observations are so pertinent and so judiciously made, as may have a
tendency to produce spiritual reflection in the mind of the reader.

5 _mo_. 24.--Having read with some attention Fleury's "Manners of the
Israelites," by A. Clarke, I am convinced that even a slight knowledge of
those ancient customs tends to facilitate the proper study of the sacred
writings; for many of the metaphors so beautifully made use of by the
prophets and apostles, and even our dear Redeemer himself, to convey a
spiritual meaning, seem to have had an evident allusion to the antique
manners and customs which I find explained in this little volume.


The commotions referred to in the reflections which follow, were no doubt
the great European war which was then raging. Buonaparte, it may be
remembered, was at that time making preparation for his Russian campaign,
and a universal alarm prevailed as to the final result of his insatiable
lust of conquest.


5 _mo_. 7.--In viewing the commotions of the times, it has induced me
seriously to consider the great importance of procuring, as far as ability
may be afforded, a free access to the never-failing source of our help;
and in a little contemplating this subject I have been comforted in a hope
that, if we only abide stedfast and immovable, He whom the waves of the
sea obeyed will in his own time speak peace to the minds of his tossed
ones, and a calm will ensue.


The perusal of Elizabeth Smith's "Fragments" occasions him to remark how
profitable it is to read the writings of others; but he wisely adds:--


I am often desirous not to rest satisfied with a bare perusal of these,
believing they are only advantageous to us so far as they stimulate to a
closer attention to that inward gift, which alone can enable us to witness
the same experience. It is often a query with me, how am I spending this
precious time, which passes so swiftly away never to return? and, in order
to answer this query aright, how desirable it is to dwell with thee, sweet
solitude! to turn inward, to examine and correct the defects of our own
disordered minds; how delightful it is to walk alone and contemplate the
beautiful scenes of nature. Yet in these retired moments, when viewing the
works of a divine hand springing up to answer the great end for which they
were created, I am often deeply perplexed with a distressing fear lest I
should not be found coming forward faithfully to answer the end of Him who
has created man for the purpose of his own glory.


The meetings for the discipline of the Society were often times of
spiritual refreshment to him.


6 _mo._ 23.--I left home to attend our Quarterly Meeting at York. The
meetings for business were generally satisfactory; on re-examining the
answers to the queries, divers very weighty remarks were made. I thought
the two meetings for worship favored seasons; and, although I left home
with reluctance, I cannot but rejoice at having given up a little time to
be made a partaker of the overflowing of that precious influence which, I
trust, made glad the hearts of many present.


The extracts which follow develope still further the progress of his inner
life, and the secret preparation of the future preacher of the Gospel and
overseer of the flock of Christ.


6 _mo._ 29.--A deep-searching time at meeting yesterday, wherein I
was given to see a little of my own unworthiness The secret breathings of
my spirit were to the Father and fountain of life, that he might be
pleased more and more to redeem me from this corrupted state of human
nature, and draw me by the powerful cords of his love into a nearer union
with the pure spirit of the Gospel.

7 _mo._ 6.--Thought an awful solemnity was the covering of our small
gathering yesterday morning, under which I felt truly thankful to the
Dispenser of every gift; and was enabled to crave his assistance to
maintain the watch with greater diligence, and pursue the ways of peace
with alacrity of soul.

29_th and_ 30_th._--The General Meeting at Ackworth was large,
and I thought very satisfactory through all its different sittings. The
meeting for worship was a remarkable time; the pure spring of gospel
ministry seemed to flow, as from vessel to vessel, until it rose into such
dominion as to declare the gracious presence of Him who is ever worthy to
be honored and adored for thus condescending to own us on such important
occasions. Iron is said to sharpen iron; and I thought it was a little the
case with me at this season, feeling very desirous to enjoy that within
myself which I so much admire in others.

8 _mo_. 13.--Many days have I gone mourning on my way, for what cause
I know not; but if I can only abide in patience till the day break and the
shadows flee away, then I trust the King of righteousness will again
appear.

25_th_.--In contemplating a little the character of that good man,
Nehemiah, I cannot but think it worthy our strictest imitation, when we
consider the heartfelt concern he manifested for the welfare of his
people, in saying, "Come and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that
we be no more a reproach." This proved him to be a man of a noble spirit
and a disinterested mind, and, I say, worthy our strictest imitation; for
to what nobler purpose can we dedicate our time than in endeavoring to
build up the broken places which are made in the walls of our Zion?


In the following entry is shown a just insight into the nature of man, and
a discernment of the uses and limits of human knowledge. Although John
Yeardley's talents were not brilliant, and his opportunities were scanty,
he possessed that intellectual thirst which cannot be slaked but at the
fountain of knowledge. At the same time he was sensitively alive to the
necessity of having all his pursuits, of whatever kind, kept within the
golden measure of the Spirit of Truth.


11 _mo_. 11.--In taking a view of some of the temporal objects to
which my attention has of late been more particularly turned, with a
desire to enlarge my ideas and improve my understanding in some of the
more useful and extended branches of literature, it has excited in me a
considerable degree of caution, lest thereby I should, in this my infant
state of mind, too much exclude the operation of that pure in-speaking
word which has undoubtedly a prior right to govern all my actions. But I
have long been convinced that the active mind of man must have some object
in pursuit to engage its attention when unemployed in the lawful concerns
of life, otherwise it is apt to range at large in a boundless field of
unprofitable thoughts and imaginations. I am aware that we may be
seasonably employed in suitable conversation to mutual advantage, and I
trust I am not altogether a stranger to the value of _sweet
retirement_; but there is a certain something in every mind which
renders a change in the exercise of our natural faculties indispensable,
in order to make us happy in ourselves and useful members of society; and
it is under these considerations that I am induced to apply a few of my
leisure hours towards some degree of intellectual attainment, in the
humble hope that I may be preserved in that path which will procure at the
hands of a wise Director that approbation which I greatly desire should
mark all my steps.


The next extract from the diary will find a response in the hearts of many
who read these pages.


1813. 2 _mo_. 17.--Never, surely, was any poor creature so weary of
his weakness! Almost in everything spiritual, and even useful, I have not
only been as one forsaken, but it has seemed as though I was to be utterly
cast off. When I have desired to feel after good, evil has never failed to
present itself. O, when will He whose countenance has often made all
within me glad, see meet to return and say, "It is enough!"


6 _mo_. 27.--The thoughts which he put into writing under this date
seem to have been occasioned by entering into business on his own account.


Am now about to enter the busy scenes of life, which sinks me into the
very depth of humility and fear, lest the concerns of an earthly nature
should deprive me of my heavenly crown, which I have so often desired to
prefer even to life itself. But O, should there remain any regard in the
breast of the Father of mercies, for one who feels so unable to cope with
the world, may he still be pleased to preserve me in his fear, and not
only to take me under the shadow of his heavenly wing, but make me willing
to abide under the guidance of his divine direction!

7 _mo_. 15.--"Cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the
scribe, lest I die there." These words of our weeping prophet have
sensibly affected my heart this morning, under a prevailing desire that my
gracious rather may not permit me to remain as in the prison-house of
worldly affairs, lest I die my spiritual death there.


We shall see that he was not successful in business; and it may be that
the disappointments he experienced in this way were in some sort an answer
to these ardent prayers to be kept from the spirit of the world.

Under date 21_st_ of the First Month, 1814, he writes:


I trust the few temporal disappointments I have met with of late have been
conducive to my best interest, having had a tendency to turn my views from
a too anxious pursuit after the things of time to a serious consideration
of the very great importance of a more strict reliance on the
never-failing arm of divine support, for the want of which I believe I
have suffered unspeakable loss.


About this time he had frequently to mourn over the difficulty of fixing
his mind in meetings for worship. He often complains of "wandering in the
unprofitable fields of vain imagination;" but sometimes also he bears a
joyful testimony to the Lord's power in enabling him to unite in spirit
with the living worshippers.

The fear of man is one of the most universal of the besetments which try
the faith of the Christian; and it may be encouraging to some to see on
this point the confession of one whose natural character was that of a
strong and independent mind.


2 _mo_. 6.--I am too apt to let in that slavish fear about men and
things which render me unable to cope with the world, and even unfits me
for properly seeking after the assistance of my Maker. O, may He who sees
my weakness enable me to overcome it!


During the summer of this year, several parties of Friends travelling in
the work of the ministry came to Burton; Sarah Lamley of Tredington, with
Ann Fairbank of Sheffield; Ann Burgess (afterwards Ann Jones); Elizabeth
Coggeshall from New York, with Mary Jefferys of Melksham; and John Kirkham
of Earl's Colne. The labors of these Friends are recorded by John Yeardley
with delight and thankfulness. He accompanied John Kirkham to Sheffield,
where they found Stephen Grellett.


How sweet it is, he remarks, to enjoy the company of these dedicated
servants, whom their great Master seems to be sending to and fro to spread
righteousness in the earth! I often think it has a tendency to help one a
little on the way towards the Land of Promise. When I consider these
favors, I am led to covet that a double portion of the spirit of the
Elijahs may so rest on the Elishas that others may also be raised to fill
up the honorable situations of those worthies, when they shall be removed
from works to rewards.


But of all the above-named, the visit of Sarah Lamley and Ann Fairbank was
for him by far the most memorable, and was the means of developing that
precious gift of ministry to which he had been called from his youth. The
extracts from his Diary which are given below speak of this visit, and
most instructively describe the time and manner in which he first received
his gift, as well as the weight which the approaching exercise of it
brought upon his mind.


5 _mo_. 27.--Sarah Lamley and Ann Fairbank lodged six nights with us,
and I accompanied them to Dirtcar and Wakefield. I can acknowledge their
innocent and agreeable company has been truly profitable to me, and has
united me very closely to their spirits in tender sympathy.

7 _mo_. 30.--Such a load of exercise prevails over my spirit, that it
requires some extra exertion to support it with my usual cheerfulness of
countenance. If I go into company, I find no satisfaction; for I cannot
appear pleasant in the society of my friends, feeling it irksome to
discourse even on matters of common conversation. From the feelings which
have attended my mind, it is evident that the cloud is at present resting
on the tabernacle, and I never saw more need for me to abide in my tent.
And O that patience may have its perfect work! for there is much to be
done in the vineyard of my own heart, before I can come to that state of
usefulness which I believe the Great [Husbandman] designs for me. The
secret language of my heart is, May his hand not spare nor his eye pity
until he has subdued all in me which obstructs the progress of his divine
work!

31_st_.--I trust I was once more favored, in meeting this morning, to
put up my secret petition in humble sincerity to the Shepherd of Israel,
that he would be graciously pleased to help my infirmities. In the
afternoon meeting I thought the petition was measurably answered; for
towards the conclusion the rays of divine light so overshadowed my mind as
to induce a belief that I should be assisted to overcome that spirit of
opposition which has too long existed to the detriment of my best
interests, if there was only a willingness to abide under the forming
hand.

8 _mo_. 1.--I now feel freedom to give a short account how it was
with me under this concern from its commencement down to the present time.

I remember well, about the year 1804, when in my father's house at
Blacker, once being in my chamber, in a very serious, thoughtful frame of
mind, receiving an impression that if ever I came to receive the truth
which I was then convinced of, to my everlasting benefit, I should have
publicly to declare of the gracious dealings of Divine Goodness to my
soul. The impression passed away with this remark deeply imprinted in my
mind, that if ever a like concern should come to be matured, I should date
the first intimation of it from this time. I was apt to view it for a
long, time as the mere workings of the enemy on my mind, and when it has
come before my view, I have often secretly said, "Get thee behind me, I
will not be tempted with such a thing." By these means I put it from me,
as it were, by force, not thinking it worthy of notice and often praying
to be delivered from such a gross delusion. At other times it would come
with such, weight on my spirit, that I could not avoid shedding tears, and
acknowledging the power which accompanied the revival of so important a
matter; and was led to query, If there is no real intention of a heavenly
nature, why am I thus harassed? and O the fervent sincerity in which I
desired that the right thing might have place, and if it was wrong, that I
might be enabled to find a release in His time who had appointed the
conflict! And I do believe, could I then have come at a perfect
resignation to the divine will, I might have been brought forward in a way
which would have afforded permanent relief to my own mind; but such was my
dislike to the work, that I suffered myself to be lulled into a state of
unbelief as to the rectitude of the concern.

Thus many outward circumstances transpired, and some years passed over,
with my only viewing the matter at a distance, until He who first laid the
concern upon me was pleased to bring it more clearly home to me, and
seemed at times to engage his servants, both in public and private, to
speak very clearly to my condition. And although I had a concurring
testimony in my own mind to their declarations, yet I had always an excuse
to flee unto by secretly saying, It may be intended for some one else;
until the Most High was graciously pleased, by the services of his sincere
handmaids, Sarah Lamley and Ann Fairbank, in their family visits to
Friends of Barnsley, as mentioned last Fifth Month, to speak so clearly to
my situation in their private opportunity with us, as to leave no room for
excuse; but I was forced to acknowledge, Thou art the man. Indeed, Sarah
Lamley was led in such an extraordinary manner, that I had no doubt at all
but that she was favored with a clear and fall sense of my state. She
began by enumerating the many fears which attended the apostles in their
various situations; how that Satan had desired to have some of them that
he might sift them as wheat in a sieve; "but," added she, "I have prayed
for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren." And how it was with Moses when the Almighty
appeared to him in a flame of fire in the bush, and that it was not until
the Most High had condescended to answer all Moses' excuses that he was
angry with him, and even then he condescended to let him have Aaron, his
brother, to go with him for a spokesman. Also how it was with Peter when
the threefold charge was given him to feed the lambs and the sheep. "It is
not enough," said she, "to acknowledge that we love the Lord, but there
must be a manifesting of our love by doing whatsoever he may command."
Methinks I still hear her voice, saying, "And O that there may not be a
pleading of excuses, Moses-like!" Thus was this valuable servant enabled
to speak to my comfort and encouragement, which I trust I shall ever
remember to advantage; but O that I may be resigned to wait the appointed
time in watchful humility, patience, and fear! for I find there is a
danger of seeking too much after outward confirmations, and not having the
attention sufficiently fixed on the great Minister of ministers, who alone
is both able and willing to direct the poor mind in this most important
concern, and in his own time to say, "Arise, shine; for thy light is
come."

12 _mo_. 22.--My poor mind has been so much enveloped in clouds of
thick darkness for months past, that I have sometimes been ready to
conclude I shall never live to see brighter days. Should even this be the
case I humbly hope ever to be preserved from accusing the just Judge of
the earth of having dealt hardly with me, but acknowledge to the last that
he has in mercy favored me abundantly with a portion of that light which
is said to shine brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.


We shall leave for the next chapter the relation of his first offerings in
the ministry, and conclude this with a striking passage which we find in
the Diary for this year.

John Yeardley was all his life very fond of the occupations of the garden.
A small piece of ground was attached to his house at Barnsley, which he
cultivated, and from which he was sometimes able to gather spiritual as
well as natural fruit.

Under date of the 22nd of the Seventh Month, he writes:--


A very sublime idea came suddenly over my mind when in the garden this
evening. It was introduced as I plucked a strawberry from a border on
which I had bestowed much cultivation before it would produce anything;
but now, thought I, this is a little like reaping the fruit of my labor.
As I thus ruminated on the produce of the strawberry-bank, I was struck
with the thought of endless _felicity_, and the sweet reward it would
produce for all our toils here below. My mind was instantly opened to such
a glorious scene of divine good that I felt a resignation of heart to give
up all for the enjoyment of [such a foretaste] of _endless felicity_.




CHAPTER II.


FROM HIS ENTRANCE ON THE MINISTRY IN 1815, TO HIS COMMISSION TO RESIDE IN
GERMANY IN 1820.

1815.--After the long season of depression through which John Yeardley
passed, as described in the last chapter, the new year of 1815 dawned with
brightness upon his mind. He now at length saw his spiritual bonds loosed;
and the extracts which follow describe his first offerings in the ministry
in a simple and affecting manner.


1 _mo._ 5.--The subject of the prophet's going down to the potter's
house opened so clearly on my mind in meeting this morning that I thought
I could almost have publicly declared it; but not feeling that weight and
certainty which I had apprehended should accompany the performance of such
an important act, I was afraid of imparting that to others which might be
intended only for my own instruction; and so it has ended for the present.
But I am thankful in hoping that I am come a little nearer to that state
of resignation which was so beautifully exemplified by our great Pattern
of all good, who when He desired the bitter cup might pass from Him,
nevertheless added, "Not my will, but thine be done." And if I am at all
acquainted with my inward feelings, I trust I can in some degree of
sincerity say that my heart desires to rejoice more in the progress of
this state of happy resignation, than at the increase of corn, wine, or
oil.


He first opened his mouth in religious testimony in the First Month of
this year. The occurrence seems to have taken place in his own family; it
yielded him a "precious sense of the Divine Presence." He began to preach
in public a few months later, but not without another struggle against the
heavenly impulse.

The friendship which Joseph Wood entertained for John Yeardley
strengthened with revolving years. When he visited Barnsley, he was
accustomed to lodge at his house; and writing to him in the year 1811,
about a public meeting which he felt concerned to hold, he says, "I can
with freedom write to thee, feeling that unity with thy spirit which
preserves us near and dear to each other, and in which freedom runs."

In the Fourth Month of this year, when Joseph Wood received a certificate
to visit some of the midland counties, J.Y. felt desirous "of setting him
a little on his way."


On the 14th, he says, we went to Woodhouse, where we had a meeting, and my
friend was enabled to speak very closely to the states of many present.
When in the meeting, I felt a very weighty exercise to attend my mind
with an intimation publicly to express it. But this exposure I dared not
yield to, under an apprehension that it might be wrong in me, considering
the occasion on which I had come out; but truly I left the place under a
burden which I was scarcely able to bear.


It was on the 20th of the Fourth Month that he began to speak in public as
a minister of the Gospel. He thus records the event:--


I felt myself in such a resigned frame of mind in our little week-day
meeting, that I could not doubt the time was fully come for me to be
relieved from that state of unspeakable oppression which my poor mind had
been held in for so many years past. Soon after I took my seat, my mind
became unusually calm, and the presence of the Most High seemed so to
abound in my heart and spread over the meeting, that after some inward
conflict I was unavoidably constrained publicly to express it, in nearly
the following words: "I think I have so sensibly felt the precious
influence of divine love to overshadow our little gathering, that I have
been ready to say, It is good for us to be here; or I might rather say, It
is good for us to feel ourselves under the precious influence of that
protecting power which can alone preserve us from the snares of death."
This first [public] act of submission to the divine will was done with as
much stability of mind and body as I was capable of; and I thought the
Friends present seemed sensible of my situation and sympathized with me
under the exercise. I trust the sweet peace which I afterwards felt was a
seal to my belief that I had been favored with divine compassion and
approbation in the needful time.


In the Fifth Month John Yeardley attended for the first time the Yearly
Meeting in London. He describes the business as very various and
instructive, but bewails his own condition as that of "one starving in the
midst of every good thing."


It seemed at times, he says, as though Satan himself was let loose upon
me, and permitted to try my faith and patience to the utmost; but I hope
the conflict had its use in teaching me to know that it is not by might,
nor by power, but by the Lord's Spirit, that we are enabled to prevail.


This was the commencement of another season of spiritual poverty. In
reading a few of his memoranda during this time, many a Christian
traveller may see his own mourning countenance reflected as in a glass.


11 _mo_. 8.--I have for a long time felt so depressed in spirit, and
so inwardly stripped of every appearance of good, that I have often
secretly had to say with tried Job, "O that I were as in months past, as
in the days when God preserved me!"

16_th_.--Death and darkness are still the covering of my poor mind,
and I am ashamed to acknowledge that I have for months past sat meeting
after meeting a victim to the baneful consequences of wandering thoughts,
scarcely being able to recollect myself so much as to ask excuse of Him
who sees in secret. In these times of deepest desertion I am selfish
enough to feel a longing desire for a ray of light or a smile from the
countenance of Him, under whose banner I have many times sat with the
greatest delight in days that are past.

O, how hard it is to regain divine favor when once sacrificed through the
sorrowful act of disobedience! O may I sit as in dust and ashes, and, with
the noble resignation and spirit of a true, dedicated follower, say, I
will patiently hear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him!


Nevertheless, even in his times of deepest humiliation, moments of
heavenly comfort were interspersed.


11 _mo_. 23.--A more improved meeting than I had reason to hope from
cross occurrences, which are too apt to ruffle the unstable mind. Daring
our silent sitting together, I was comforted in contemplating the many
encouraging passages we have left on sacred record; two of which, spoken
by one of large experience, were particularly solacing to my exercised
feelings: "Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord
delivereth him out of them all;" and "The young lions do lack and suffer
hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing." O,
thought I, if we could only procure Him on our side who has the thoughts
of all men in his keeping, what should we have to fear! We should then be
brought to acknowledge that it behooves a Christian traveller to crave the
assistance of Him who can enable us to suffer with becoming fortitude and
resignation all the afflicting dispensations of life, rather than desire
to be preserved from meeting them.


The hard mutter which is the subject of the next extract embodies a
difficulty that has perplexed many. It is always encouraging to find
companionship in doubts and trials, and perhaps the consideration which
pacified the mind of John Yeardley may be helpful to some who are tried in
the same way. The passage, no doubt, has reference to his own want of
better success in business.


11 _mo._ 30.--When any circumstance in the common course of life,
which has appeared to turn up in the direction of Divine Providence, has
not answered my expectation, or on deliberate consideration it has not
seemed prudent for me to step into it, I have sometimes felt greatly
discouraged, and been ready to conclude, How could this thing be ordered
under the direction of best wisdom! But let me ever remember, He who has
his way in the whirlwind knows what is best for us; and were it not for
these incitements to an exercise of feeling, the mind would be apt to lie
dormant, and not be preserved alive in a proper state to prove all things
and hold fast that which is best.


About the end of the year he was obliged to spend several days in London
on business. The course of his affairs seems to have been uneven, and the
great city was probably uncongenial to his retired habits. He says:--


12 _mo_. 15.--I do not remember that my feelings were ever more
discouraging, both inwardly and outwardly. When the mind is ruffled about
the things of time, it is hard work to make any progress towards the land
of peace. I try to get to the well of water; but truly it may be said I
have nothing to draw with.


Yet even under these circumstances his daily religious practices--those
which no competitor for the meed of peace and the crown of glory can
dispense with--were not without avail.


16_th_.--In reading and retirement before I left my room, I received
a little hope that I should be preserved in a good degree of patience
through the cross occurrences of the day, which was measurably the case.


The life of a Christian is very much the history of outward and inward
trials. How happy it is when these serve only to deepen his experience!
The nature of John Yeardley's spiritual trials has been fully shown: his
temporal crosses have also been glanced at; they consisted mainly of want
of success in business, in which, indeed, he was little fitted to excel,
under the keen competition of modern times.


1816. 1 _mo_. 4.--A new year has commenced, but the old afflictions
are still continued, both inwardly and outwardly; for even in temporal
affairs disappointments rage high. But O what a privilege to sink down to
the anchor-hope of divine support! This is what I can feelingly
acknowledge this evening to be as a brook by the way to refresh my poor
and long-distressed mind. O, how ardently do I desire that this season of
adversity may be sanctified to me for everlasting good, and prove the
means of slaying that will in me, which has too long been opposed to the
will of Him who paid the ransom for my soul with nothing less than the
price of his own precious blood.


The difficulty of making his way in the commercial world increased until
the risk of "failure began to stare him in the face." The fear of such a
result sank him exceedingly low; but through all he was permitted to keep
his footing upon the rock, and to behold a spiritual blessing under the
guise of temporal adversity.


7_th_.--Surely it is a mark of divine favor to feel the supporting
hand of my heavenly Father underneath, to bear up my drooping spirits in
this time of adversity. I think I was never more sensible of his powerful
arm being made bare for my deliverance; and yet, unaccountable to tell, I
am almost afraid to trust in him. O, my soul, wherefore dost thou doubt,
when thou feelest the glorious presence of thy Redeemer's countenance to
shine upon thee?

In the meeting this morning, he continues, my mind was profitably
exercised in contemplating the following subject. When our dear Lord was
about to perform the miracle of feeding the multitude, he commanded them
to sit down upon the grass. They were undoubtedly hungry, and this might
create in them too great an anxiety to be satisfied in their own time; but
that all things might be done in order, and without interruption, they
were commanded to sit down and wait the disposal of their food from the
bountiful hand of their great Master. In looking at the subject, I thought
it a lively representation of the state of mind we ought to labor after,
when favored to feel hunger and thirst after righteousness; not
frustrating the design of the Most High by being too anxious to be filled
in our own will and way, but patiently waiting the time of Him who giveth
to all their meat in due season, and that which is most convenient for
them. And what greater privilege could we desire than to be fed at the
Lord's table?

9_th_.--As my precious wife and I were consoling each other this
evening, she remarked that the dispensation we were now suffering under
was probably in answer to our prayers. This brought strikingly to my
remembrance a secret petition which I have frequently put up in the most
fervent manner I have been capable of, when deeply lamenting my
unsubjected will; I have even cried out aloud, "O make me willing; do,
Lord, make me willing, make me willing!"

O then may I submit to the means, if for this end they are appointed, and
resign my all, body, soul and spirit, into the hands of Him who gave them;
and may I patiently endure the swelling of Jordan in a manner that will
enable me to bring from the bottom, stones of everlasting memorial.


After this he was led for a while by the Good Shepherd into the green
pastures and beside the still waters.


1_st mo_. 15.--Our Monthly Meeting at Wakefield, and a heavenly
meeting it was.

29_th_.--I left home for a journey into the north on business. I had
many precious seasons of retirement as I rode along, and I humbly trust my
soul has been enabled to cultivate a more intimate acquaintance with her
Beloved, in such a way as will not easily be erased from my remembrance.


Notwithstanding the deep and varied experience he had passed through, his
unwillingness to expose himself as a preacher of the gospel was still
strong, and sometimes obstructed the performance of his duty.


8 _mo_. 20.--Joseph Wood had a public meeting at Pilley. I felt
something on my spirit to communicate to the people in the early part, but
thinking the meeting was not sufficiently settled to receive it, I
reasoned away the right time; another did not offer during the whole
meeting for me to relieve my poor mind, so I brought my burden home with
me, which indeed proved such as I really thought I should have sunk under.


The "severe stripes," as he terms it, which he received on this occasion
at length produced a willing mind.


9 _mo_. 10.--I went with my dear wife to attend the burial of my
cousin Joseph Watts at Woodhouse, and was at the meeting there on
Fourth-day the 11th. It was largely attended by relations and friends. I
felt so sensibly the danger that some present were in of trifling away the
reproofs of conviction, that I could not forbear reviving the language
which was proclaimed to the Prophet Jonah, when he had fled from the
presence of the Lord and was fallen asleep in the ship, "What meanest
thou, O sleeper, arise, call upon thy God." After commenting a little on
the subject, I sat down under great solemnity which seemed to cover the
meeting, and I can thankfully say the fruit of obedience was sweet to my
taste.

12 _mo_. 1.--Went to meeting this morning with a fearful apprehension
lest I should have to expose myself in that which is so contrary to my
natural inclination. And so it proved; for I had not sat long, before I
was made willing to express what rested weightily on my mind, and that was
the case of Gideon, when the angel appeared to him under the oak as he
threshed wheat. I commented a little on the subject, which afforded me
great satisfaction and joy.


In the following entry, notwithstanding the tardy obedience which it
records, we find his commission as one of the Lord's watchmen sealed upon
his mind.


1817. 4 _mo_. 7. In meeting yesterday morning I was enabled publicly
to relieve myself of a little matter which had been a burden on my mind
for two or three meetings past, in which I had felt pretty smartly the rod
which, is held over the head of the disobedient. In this instance, human
nature seemed stubborn in a double degree, but after it was over I felt my
peace flow as a river. Methinks I now hear this language proclaimed in the
secret of my heart: I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel;
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. O what
an important charge! May I duly consider the weight of it, and so watch
over my own conduct, in thought, word and action, that I may not be
pulling down with one hand that which I may be endeavoring to build up
with the other. If I am to be an instrument in the hand of the Almighty,
may he graciously condescend to prepare and sharpen the arrows he may see
meet to shoot through the medium of his poor servant, so that they may
sink deep, wound the hypocrite, and comfort the pure divine life in the
hearts of his children.


A few weeks after this, John Yeardley attended a remarkable meeting held
by Joseph Wood, in which they were made to sit in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus.


4 _mo_. 29.--I attended another public meeting appointed by J.W. at
Middletown, about ten miles from here. When I entered the town I felt very
flat, and was ready to say, The fear of the Lord is not in this place; but
after the meeting was gathered, I soon found what poor creatures we are,
to judge of these things without waiting for best direction; for I think
it was the most extraordinary time I ever knew. My friend bore a long and
powerful testimony, to the tendering of many present. If I ever forget it
while in my natural senses, I fear I shall be near losing my habitation
the truth; for it was as if heaven opened, and the Most High poured down
his blessed Spirit in an unbounded degree.


All this time his business affairs went on more and more adversely; and
although he never failed punctually to meet all his money engagements, his
want of success led in this year to a change of residence to Bentham.

Three months before he left Barnsley he writes:--


"Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where they
fine it." Pecuniary difficulties seem as if they would eat up every green
thing; but I hope and trust that He who has often said, Peace, be still,
will so regulate the heat of the furnace that I may be able to bear it
with becoming patience, until there be nothing left in me but what
resembles the pure gold fit for the Master's use. When I reflect on what
my poor mind has passed through for more than two years past, I am
convinced nothing short of that Arm which brought the Israelites through
the Red Sea could have supported me. And O, should he ever loose my hands,
that I may serve Him freely, may I never forget the many covenants made
with Him who has so often heard and answered my prayer when in deep
distress!


Through the assistance of some of his Barnsley friends, an offer was made
to him of a situation in a flax-spinning mill at Bentham, which was then
or had lately been the property of Charles Parker, a minister in the
Society of Friends. He accepted the offer; and an extract from a letter to
his wife, when on a journey, will show the motives under which he acted in
this important step.


Hawkshead, 6 mo. 28, 1817.

MY VERY PRECIOUS DEAR,

When I wrote thee last, my time and feelings would not permit me to say
much on our impending prospect of leaving Barnsley; but since then this
very important subject has obtained my most serious and weighty
consideration, and I am now free to communicate to thee my feelings, in
order that thou mayest weigh them duly and compare them with thy own while
we are separated. In the first place, in taking such a step, we must be
reconciled to sacrifice our present comfortable home, our relations and
friends--in short, all that may seem near and dear to us as to the
outward. With respect to our spiritual prospect, I must confess, if any
service is designed for me in the Church militant, I have sometimes
apprehended it might be within the compass of our present Particular and
Monthly Meetings; but should this be ordered otherwise in best wisdom, I
trust I shall be relieved from the oppressive feeling, and in a short time
see my way clear. On the other hand, if this change takes place, we have a
probability of a comfortable living, and of being relieved from the
extreme anxiety attendant on trade, when the whole responsibility rests on
our own shoulders.

H.R. [one of the firm who had offered to employ him] seemed rather
desirous for me to come. If we should agree, he wants me to go over
directly to lay down plans for a few weavers' houses, and to make other
arrangements to save time until we could remove.

I don't much like the situation of the house in the town, but I think
another might be had if required. They have a nice one in Low Bentham,
with a good garden attached, which would be at liberty in next Fifth
Month; this would be a pleasant walk from the mill by the water-side all
the way, which might be useful to my health after being confined in the
warehouse, and much nearer to the meeting. It is a very small meeting
indeed; there are only about two female Friends; but, should we be in the
right place, the smallness of the number would not preclude our access to
the divine spring.

I don't know how we shall come on with the thread trade, but it seems as
if we were to be done out with both thread and linens, for there is
scarcely any thing selling with me on this journey.


John Yeardley and his wife removed to Bentham in the Eighth Month, 1817.
Bentham is a considerable village on the north-west border of Yorkshire, a
few miles from the foot of Ingleborough; and it was at that time,
according to the division of the county adopted by the Society of Friends,
comprised in the Monthly Meeting of Settle.

After a season of deep spiritual poverty, during which he found no place
for the exercise of his gift, John Yeardley began to speak in ministry in
the little meeting to which he now belonged. On recording the circumstance
he remarks:--


Thus does a gracious Father lead on his children step by step, baptizing
them first into one state and then into another, in order to qualify them
to drop a word in season for the comfort of others. Little did I think
under the recent buffetings of the Enemy, that I should ever have had to
open my mouth again in the way of declaring the everlasting goodness of a
gracious Redeemer.


This memorandum was made a few days after the occurrence to which it
refers, on his return from Settle Monthly Meeting, and is accompanied
the record of a fresh unfolding to his mental eye of the need of gospel
laborers, and of his own vocation to the work. In my return I had rather
an unusual opening into the state of society, and the great want of
laborers therein; and querying with myself, By whom shall the Lord send? I
thought I felt the weight and power of the everlasting gospel upon me to
preach, so that I was willing to say, Here am I; send me. O the importance
of this language! May the same Spirit, which I trust raised it in my heart
preserve me in every state to the end of time! Amen.


The extract which follows treats of the same subject,--the calling and
exercise of the ministry. From this, and from the whole tenor of what has
been extracted from the Diary, will be seen in what his ministry
consisted, and what was the call and the power which was required in every
successive exercise of it. May it serve as a word of caution and
instruction to such as are disposed to reduce this heavenly gift to a mere
effort of Christian good-will, or to consider the exercise of it as
placed, whether in regard to time or subject, at the disposal of the
minister. It will be observed how John Yeardley, in after life so abundant
in word and doctrine, and so catholic in his ideas and sympathies,
received his vocation as a divine gift immediately from above, and served
in it an apprenticeship altogether spiritual, and apart from human
learning or instruction.


10 _mo_. 26.--I have been very much instructed to-day in reading and
reflecting on the 37th chapter of Ezekiel. When the prophet was asked if
the dry bones could live, he was wise enough cautiously to answer, "O Lord
God, thou knowest;" but when he was commanded to prophesy unto them, and
say, "O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord," this was hard work, yet
there was no conferring with flesh and blood. No reasoning from
probabilities, nothing but an implicit faith and dependence on the divine
power which was then upon him, could have enabled him to do it. O what an
instructive lesson! When the poor instruments may feel so weak and the
state of things so low, that there may not be the least probability of
good arising, it is enough if they can only do the will of their great
Master, and be enabled to say with the holy prophet, "I prophesied as the
Lord commanded."


John Yeardley did not take his actual farewell of Barnsley until the end
of the year. The reflections which he has recorded on leaving his home of
so many years are very characteristic of the man:--


1818. 1 _mo_.--The Twelfth Month was spent at Barnsley in settling my
affairs. Just before I left Bentham for that purpose, I was exceedingly
unhappy at the idea of leaving my home, friends, &c. at Barnsley, and
thought the parting feeling would be almost more than I could support. I
was enabled to pray fervently to the Father of spirits, that he would be
pleased to afford me strength to bear the change with Christian fortitude,
and resign all to the disposal of his divine will; and thankful I am to
relate, he so answered my request that I could leave the place to which I
had been so long attached without a sigh. I have no doubt my removal,
without consulting more of my friends, will appear strange to many. This I
could never feel liberty to do; nor could I make any person living
acquainted with my entire motive, but my precious wife. Whatever may be
the opinion of others, this is a matter which rests between me and my God;
and I often think it a favor that we are not accountable to man, who views
too much the outside appearance, while He with whom we have to do looks at
the heart.

After I had left Barnsley I went to Pontefract, to spend a few days with
my friends there, where my poor lass had been for a week. I don't know
that this time was unprofitably spent; but this I know--it never requires
more care and watchfulness to be preserved in a seasonable frame of spirit
than when the mind is set at ease to enjoy the company of a few intimate
friends. We are too apt to get our thoughts dissipated, and thus our
conversation becomes less seasoned with grace than it would be if the
girdle of truth were kept tightly bound.


The next entry notices a remarkable interview which, he had with a woman
Friend from America:--


15_th_.--This day a meeting has been held at the desire of Hannah
Field from North America. I stepped down to see her at J. Stordy's; and in
the few minutes we were together, before she took leave, she addressed
herself to me in a very feeling manner. Although she was an entire
stranger, she spoke so pointedly to my state of mind, and expressed the
reward of faithfulness in such encouraging terms, that my feelings were in
nowise able to resist the power which attended, but I was forced to
acknowledge it as a nail fastened in a sure place.


Amongst some letters addressed by Elizabeth Yeardley to Susanna Harvey of
Barnsley, is one in which mention is made of the visit of Hannah Field to
Bentham; and, although the passage does not relate to the private
interview described above, it is interesting as the reminiscence of a
remarkable woman.

Bentham, 2 _mo_. 2, 1818.

We have been favored lately with a visit, unexpected but highly
acceptable, from that great minister, Hannah Field, from America. She very
much resembles Sarah Lamley; and when she began, it seemed as if one had
been informing her of the state of the meeting. Her discourse began with
the parable of the Ten Virgins, which was very beautiful but awful.
Addressing herself again, she was very consolatory and affecting. She is
tall and inclined to _embonpoint_; her age fifty-three.


In the Third Month of this year, the Monthly Meeting from which he had
recently removed, that of Pontefract, recorded its approval of his
ministry. It is not usual for meetings to do this in the case of one who
has gone to reside elsewhere. The practice at that time was, in Yorkshire
at least, in issuing a certificate of removal for a Friend who had begun
to exercise the ministry and was still under probation, to notice the fact
of his preaching, without pronouncing a judgment upon it. But when the
usual document of removal was asked for at the Monthly Meeting, on behalf
of John Yeardley, the meeting paused upon the words which noticed his
offerings in the ministry, and solemnly resolved then and there to give
him a full certificate as a minister in unity, and to "recommend him as
such to the Quarterly Meeting." It happened that men and women Friends
were together, the latter remaining whilst Joseph Wood laid a concern for
some religious service before the joint meeting.

John Yeardley remarks on this act of his late Monthly Meeting:--


The concurrence of my friends with my small offerings cannot but feel
comfortable and encouraging to a poor timorous creature like me; but the
awful consideration of ranking among the servants who speak in the Lord's
name humbles me to the dust. Surely those who are designed to minister
before the Lord in his holy temple ought to bear the inscription of
holiness upon them. The means by which this inscription, is obtained is so
painful to flesh and blood that we are always ready to shrink from the
operation. When we have borne the furnace heated to a certain degree, we
are ready to fancy nothing but pure gold remains; until the refining hand
sees meet to administer fresh [trials], then we are ready again to cry
out, If it be thy will, let this cup pass by.


In the Sixth Month he joined Joseph Wood and William Midgley of Rochdale,
in visiting some neighboring meetings. Of Kendal, which was one, he says
it appeared to him "as if a remarkable revival was taking place in those
parts;" and he concludes his short account of the journey with an
acknowledgment of the satisfaction he felt in having given up to this
little service.

Joseph Wood in his diary relates the same visit more at large. We have
extracted the account of that portion of it in which John Yeardley was
engaged, and believe the reader will find it interesting in several
respects.


1818. 6 _mo_. 10.--Reached my beloved friend John Yeardley's house,
in Bentham, about half-past eight o'clock, where we took up our quarters,
and where we were favored with a renewed feeling of that love which had
many times nearly united our spirits together.

On the 11th we spent this day very comfortably with these long-beloved and
truly valuable friends, and in the evening Lad a public meeting appointed
for Friends and people of other societies in their meeting-house in
Bentham, about a mile and a half from their house. We walked thither, it
being very pleasant through the fields. The meeting began at half-past
six, and held two hours and a quarter. A pretty many who usually attend
meetings, and a great concourse of people of other societies, attended,
that the meeting-house, both above and below stairs, was well filled, and
several were in the passage and in an adjoining room. A precious solemnity
mercifully overshadowed us, whereby the minds of many were prepared to
receive what the Lord was pleased instrumentally to communicate to the
many different states; and O that they may individually profit thereby!
for sure it was a time of favor unto many. I had a very long testimony to
bear therein, first from Isaiah lviii. 1, 2. John Yeardley held a pretty
long time next, from John ii. 4. I next, from 1 Cor. xiv. 19.

On the 12th we set out for Wray in Lancashire, five miles, John Yeardley
being our guide, taking his wife and Ann Stordy along with him in a taxed
cart. We had a very pleasant ride thither, down a beautiful valley,
through which the river Wenning runs; had on our right hand a line view of
Hornby Castle, now in part gone to decay. Got to Wray about half-past ten,
and went to the meeting, which began at eleven o'clock. Twenty-three
persons attended, one of whom appeared to be of another society. I sat
therein for a considerable time in a very low state, and feeling a concern
to stand up, I gave up, although in great weakness: different states
opened and were spoken to in the authority of the gospel; and I had a long
testimony to bear from Luke xv. 8. John Yeardley had a pretty long time
next, from Lam. iii. 26; afterwards I was concerned in prayer, and felt
truly thankful for the renewed mark of divine favor, and secretly rejoiced
that my lot was cast here.


On the 13th John Yeardley accompanied Joseph Wood to Kendal.


It was with difficulty, says J.W., we got into the town for the crowd of
people; the Parliament being dissolved, and a new election of members
about to take place; and there being an opposition in this county; Henry
Brougham, the favorite candidate of the people, against the Lonsdales.
They were waiting his arrival in the town to canvass for votes. After tea
I went to Thomas Wilson's; his house was nearly opposite the inn where
Henry Brougham put up. When he arrived the populace took his horses from
the carriage, and hurried him into the town, and to the inn, four flags
flying and a band of music went before him. After he alighted he went into
an upper room, and addressed the largest multitude of people that I ever
saw collected, from the window, for about an hour, in a very impressive
manner; and so great was the crowd in the street that many fainted. All
was quiet, and, after he had done, they separated in a becoming manner.

On the 14th we attended their meetings in Kendal. The forenoon meeting
began at ten o'clock. It is large, and was pretty open and satisfactory. I
had a long testimony to bear therein, first, from John xv. 14. John
Yeardley had a pretty long time next. He opened from these words: "O thou,
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, manifest thyself that thou yet
reignest in Israel." I next, from Proverbs ix. 12.


After visiting several other meetings, Joseph Wood came to Lancaster,
where he was again met by John Yeardley.


On the 21st we attended both their meetings in Lancaster. The forenoon
meeting began at ten o'clock. When we got there we were agreeably
surprised to find dear John Yeardley, who had walked this morning fifteen
miles to meet us. The meeting was large of Friends, and it proved a time
of renewed visitation unto many who were afar off, and of encouragement to
those who were nigh. I had a very long testimony to bear therein, from
Matt. xxii. 12. John Yeardley had a short but very acceptable time next,
from Esther iv. 14. Afterwards I was concerned in prayer.


Elizabeth Yeardley speaks of this visit in one of her letters:--


J.Y. went to Lancaster, though the day was unfavorable. He trudged on foot
to meet Joseph Wood, and got in good time for the meeting, fifteen miles
distant, and returned home the same evening. J. W. was very much favored
all the time he was in those parts; he really appears endowed with
astonishing powers.


The same letter affords a glimpse of the social position, which John and
Elizabeth Yeardley occupied at Bentham:--


We are very quiet, have kind neighbors, a very pleasant habitation, and
little society, plenty of books both of the religious and amusing kind,
and leisure to meditate on the one thing needful, which is to fit us for
that place to which we are fast hastening:--


     "For who the longest lease enjoy
       Have told us with a sigh,
     That to be born seems little more
       Than to begin to die."

(13_th of Seventh Month_, 1818.)



John Yeardley, no less than his wife, found in Bentham a seasonable
retreat from the harassing cares of the world. A memorandum made in the
autumn of this year shows that the doubts with which he was perplexed on
the subject of his removal from Barnsley, were entirely dispelled, and
that the change in his abode and position had been the happy means of
relieving him from the load of anxiety which once seemed ready to crush
him.


1819. 9 _mo_. 15.--The tender, merciful Father who shelters our heads
in battle has covered mine when many things were hot upon me. He has
provided a retreat for me until the fury of the oppressor be overpast. I
have often wondered at the cause which drove me from my former residence,
but I now begin to see pointedly the hand of Providence bringing me to
this place of quiet retreat. Should He who has brought me thus far see it
to be for my good to set me on the banks of deliverance, may I have no
desire to live for anything but to sing his praise!


After being recognised by the Church as a minister, he was again tried
with a season of spiritual desertion; and this phase in his religious
history, with his reflections upon it, and the holy resolution and hope
with which he concludes, may be useful in strengthening the faith of
others under similar circumstances.


10 _mo_. 4.--O what a stripping time have I had since I wrote last!
My pen would fail to set forth the inward desertion I have experienced for
months past, so that my poor mind is almost worn out with waiting and
watching in the absence of the Bridegroom of souls. My enemy seems to have
set up his throne in me, and leads my wandering thoughts captive at his
pleasure. I have no weapons of my own to fight him with, and it seems as
if Infinite Goodness had refused me the grant of that armor which I have
before experienced the means of putting my adversary to flight. For what
end this may be I know not, but the suffering time is hard to the natural
part. If I am left to perish, O may it be in praying, trusting and
believing in my Redeemer's love! and if I am not suffered to behold again
the brightness of his glorious countenance here on earth, may I be favored
with it shining on me in heaven!


At the commencement of this year, 1819, apprehending himself required to
pay a religious visit to the families of Friends in Barnsley, he consulted
Joseph Wood on the subject, who encouraged him "not to be afraid to
pursue" the path which had been opened before him. In relation to this
prospect of service, J.Y. has the following pertinent remarks on the
ministry:--


2 _mo_. 19.--If I am suffered to go, may the humble spirit of Jesus
go with me, and put a word in my heart that may prove as a sword in my
hand, with which I may fight his battles! This is the only way in which
his servants can minister so as to reach the witness in the hearts of his
children. We might speak on subjects which might seem right and fit in
themselves, but it is as our hearts come to be acted upon immediately by
the Spirit of truth, the same principle which prepares us to utter sound
words, prepares also a counterpart in the minds of others to receive them.
Thus it may be said we become _one_ in spirit and truly edified
together in the love of the Gospel.


In order to perform the visit, J.Y. had, in the good order in use amongst
Friends, to receive the concurrence of his Monthly Meeting.


3 _mo_. 10.--Was at the Monthly Meeting, where I mentioned to my
friends my prospect of visiting Barnsley, and obtained their sympathetic
concurrence, with a copy of a minute expressing their full unity and
approbation.

My feelings on the occasion were very different from what I had
anticipated. A divine solemnity appeared so to cover the minds of all
present, that the enemy was trodden under foot, and not a fear was
suffered to approach. What condescending goodness of a tender Father to
his weak children!


Some interesting notice of this service, and of the journey which he made
to perform it, is contained in his Diary.


13_th_.--The evening before I set off, I was earnestly engaged in
supplicating for divine protection both inward and outward; and an
assurance was given me that it should be granted, and in a manner so clear
as I had no right to expect. These words were as if spoken distinctly in
my outward ears: "A hair of thy head shall not be hurt." In the confidence
of this promise I went forth, and found it mercifully made good; for
though I was overturned in the mail on the road, a hair of my head was not
hurt, and not so much as a fear was suffered to come near.


On the 18th, after visiting all the families, he attended the Week-day
Meeting, where he had to review his labors, and to address the assembled
Friends "nearly in these words:--In the course of my little proceedings
among my friends in this place, I have sometimes been baptized for the
dead, while at other times I have been made to rejoice in the resurrection
of life: I hope this is a language my friends will understand." After this
he preached to them on the case of Nicodemus, saying that there may be a
time when our Heavenly Father, in his tender compassion for our infant
state, permits us to come to Jesus by night or in secret; yet when he is
pleased to say, "Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee," danger will betide us if we then flinch from an
open confession. Some time after he had finished, a woman Friend rose and
uttered a few words. She had never before been able to overcome the force
of her natural fears.

In noticing this circumstance, J.Y. says he does so because, before he
went to Barnsley, he asked that if his small services were acceptable, the
Most High would give him a sign, by owning his labors with his sensible
approbation, and making him an instrument to help forward his work in the
hearts of his children.

On another occasion, in allusion to a similar occurrence, he has the
following reflections:--


"The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom; but we preach
Christ crucified." I am like the two former, because I dare even to ask a
sign and to seek after wisdom; but to be like the latter is what I covet
most sincerely--to preach Christ crucified, not only in words, but in life
and conversation. If I err in sometimes asking for a sign, I trust it will
be forgiven, because it is done in the simplicity of my heart, to know my
Father's will, and we have examples of this having been granted to the
worthies in times of old.--(12 _mo_. 8.)


In the Twelfth Month of 1819, John Yeardley attended the Quarterly Meeting
at York, and has some religious service on the way. His account of this
little journey is preceded by some instructive reflections on his own
infirmities and lack of ready obedience.


9 _mo_. 15.--I feel exceedingly discouraged at my own obstinacy in
not keeping more humble, watchful, and attentive to the inward monitor. I
am sensible loss is sustained in a religions sense by giving way too much
to an airy disposition.

12 _mo_. 12.--When I consider the many years which have elapsed since
I first enlisted under the Lord's banner, I find cause deeply to reproach
myself for want of a more early and implicit obedience to the _divine
will_; the want of which, I fully believe, has been the means of
plunging me into seas of trouble and years of perplexity. I fear the time
lost will never be redeemed. O, should I ever have to warn others to
beware of the rock on which I have split, surely it may be done through
heartfelt experience indeed! And as the glorious light of the sun begins
mercifully to verge from under the cloud, O, may I never, never forget the
sacred covenant made in the days of my deep distress, that if the Lord
would loosen my bonds, then would I serve him freely.

25_th_.--I went to Thornton to R.W.'s, and next day to Lothersdale
Meeting, accompanied by D.W. and some other part of R.W.'s family. The
forepart of that meeting was very trying, at which I did not wonder, if we
might judge from a previous feeling; for ever since the prospect of this
little visit presented to my view, I felt a load on my spirit which I
could not by any means cast off. On entering the place, I thought, when
our dear Lord sent forth his disciples, he commanded them to take neither
purse nor scrip; and that if this state of poverty of spirit was any badge
of discipleship, some of us might claim to wear it. The language of the
weeping prophet came also before me--"O that my head were waters, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of
the daughter of my people." It was hard work for me, a poor stripling, to
have to intimate such close things; but the conclusion was easier to the
natural part, I having to address a few to whom the language seemed to go
forth, of "Mary, the Master is come, and calleth for thee."

I went from thence to the Quarterly Meeting at York, which was thinly
attended. The meeting for worship seemed a cloudy season; however a little
matter impressed my mind which I was thankful in being enabled to get rid
of, though hard to flesh and blood, it being the first time my voice has
been heard in this Quarterly Meeting in ministry. The meeting for business
was long and tedious, being protracted four and a half days by an appeal.
It was disagreeable in its nature, but was conducted in a way to afford
information and instruction to the minute observer of men, manners and
things.


1820.--Our first extract from this year's diary contains a short but
beautiful reflection:--


2 _mo_. 18.--I am convinced it would be better for us to live more in
the inward spirit of prayer; we should live in nearer union with the
Father of love; receive more of his heavenly embraces; the heart would be
prepared to know more of his holy will, and receive power to perform it.


When John Yeardley left Barnsley he commenced a correspondence with his
brother Thomas, which lasted until the death of the latter, J.Y.'s letters
have been preserved, and supply us with much that is valuable in his
character and Christian experience. The following extract shows the power
of sympathy which he possessed towards those with whom he was entirely
intimate:--


4 mo. 24, 1820.

Thy affectionate letter I received with pleasure, though some parts of its
contents penetrated the deepest recesses of my heart, and excited in me
every tender sympathetic feeling of a brother and a friend.

I rejoice that thou hast found freedom to speak so candidly the
undisguised language of thy heart; to me it seems like a voice from the
dead, because I conceive it to be the voice of that awakened principle in
thee which, as in many others, may have been held too long in captivity
through the predominance of the surfeiting cares of the world. Whenever
thou inclinest to unbosom to me thou mayest do it with freedom and in
confidence, for, be assured, if thy complaints cannot meet with relief,
they will at least meet with a welcome reception and a heartfelt
condolence; for I could have no claim to the least of the Christian
virtues, if I were destitute of a feeling regard for the sufferings of a
friend, and especially a brother.


A few months afterwards he was again called upon deeply to sympathise with
his brother. The occasion this time was the perplexity in matters of
business in which Thomas Yeardley was involved. He expressed his feelings
in a letter in which he not only gives the soundest Christian counsel, but
also shows how he was himself indebted to the same maxims for the
preservation of his honor and of his spiritual life and usefulness. The
firm and practical manner in which the subject is treated render his
remarks of permanent value.


Bentham, 8 mo. 7, 1820,

MY DEAR BROTHER,

Thy affectionate letter of the 24th I have received, and need not tell
thee how sensibly I am concerned for thy present situation.

I do hope thou wilt not lose sight of the object thou hast now in view, to
get relieved in some way from the excessive load of business which presses
upon thee, for we can none of us carry fire in our bosoms too long without
being burnt. We shall not be justified in the sight of Him with whom we
have to do, if we do not endeavor to place ourselves in such a situation
as will best answer the end for which he has designed us. It would convict
us of a very weak and erroneous idea of a Supreme Being, to suppose that
he could not or would not prosper our endeavors with equal success in a
more restricted way of trade, when our motives are purely to serve him
faithfully. Surely, He who cares for the sparrows will not suffer
_us_ to fall to the ground without his notice.

Thou wilt be ready to say it is an easy matter to speak of these things on
paper; but believe me, my dear brother, I know a little of what I say.
There was a time when I was as extensively engaged in business,
_according to my means_, as you are now. I have had large sums of
acceptances to provide for, with nothing towards them but what was in the
uncertainty of the drapers' hands. When I have set out on a journey I have
had to take the distressing fear along with me, that if I failed of
getting in almost every shilling that was due to me, I failed in paying my
acceptances. Add to this, the painful prospect of losing my property until
I could not pay my just debts, and then mention a situation which would
place an honest mind in a greater degree of perplexity. O! had it not been
for the preserving hand of my gracious Redeemer, I had never lifted up my
head above the waters which were ready to overwhelm me. In the midst of
all this I received a firm conviction, that if I wound up as speedily as
circumstances would admit, I should measurably be safe; but if I suffered
the impression to pass away disregarded, I might be hurled along with the
stream and never more be able to recover myself. It seemed as if my eye
was fixed on a star which shone quite on the other side of the [waters];
and I was thus enabled to wade through, without, knowing what course to
take when I got to the other side. I do not mention this as being in the
whole applicable to thy case; but as a fellow Christian traveller towards
the celestial city, I earnestly intreat thee, in the love of the gospel,
never to consider thyself on a level, or at liberty to act in full scope,
with the man of business, who thinks himself created to pursue the things
of time without being responsible to his Creator for endeavoring to reach
a situation in life which would enable him to prepare for eternity. Thou
wilt not be long at a loss what to do if thou dost not overlook the secret
motive in thy own breast. Do not grieve at losing a little of what thou
hast; it will come again, if for the best, and may bring the double reward
of peace. If thou attendest to that directing Hand which has hitherto
preserved thee as a monument of thy Heavenly Father's mercy, thy victory
is already sure, though thou mayst not know it. It is not for the test,
consequently not permitted, that we should always see our way. Were this
the case there would be no exercise of faith. The servant of the prophet
was blind as to the power which preserved them, when he saw a host of the
enemy encamped against them: he cried out, "Alas, my master, how shall we
do!" But his master answered, "Fear not; for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them;" and the prophet prayed that the young man
might be made to see. And when his eyes were opened, what did he see? Why,
he saw the mountain full of horses and chariots of fire round about them.
The Lord's chosen people are continually encircled with these chariots of
fire, otherwise it would not be possible to be so mercifully preserved
from harm. Should it be insinuated to thee that thou art not of this
chosen race, let me tell thee, we become children of the Most High as soon
as he has raised in us a desire to serve him, and we become willing to
abide under his protecting wing whatever changes may take place in our own
feelings during the operation of his holy hand upon us.


Nothing is more important in the life of a Christian than the manner in
which he turns to account the opportunities for serving his Lord which
continually spring up before him.


6 _mo_. 23.--Going last evening to Wenington, to repeat my French
lesson, my friends there asked me to call with them on a sick person;
feeling quite free to do so, I went with them. On sitting quietly by the
bedside, a little matter came before me, which was communicated from these
words: "Affliction cometh not forth of the dust."

On my return home, I could not but reflect on the necessity of having our
bow strung, and being always alive to the interest of souls, and
endeavoring to imitate the example of our great Master, whose whole life
was employed in continually going up and down doing good.




CHAPTER III.


FROM HIS COMMISSION TO RESIDE ABROAD IN 1820 TO HIS REMOVAL TO GERMANY
IN 1822.

In 1822 John Yeardley went to reside in Germany. As his residence abroad
constituted one of the most remarkable turns in his life, and exercised a
powerful influence on the rest of his career, we shall develop as fully as
we are able the motives by which he was induced to leave his native
country. By means of his Diary we can trace the early appearance and
growth, if not the origin, of the strong Christian sympathy he ever
afterwards manifested with seeking souls in the nations on the continent
of Europe, and especially amongst the German people.

The first hint concerning his desire to go abroad is contained in the
account of a dream, under date of the 2nd of the Ninth Month, 1818,
regarding which he felt much disappointed, because he could not recollect
the names of the places in Germany about which he had in his dream been
interested. The next year (the 19th of the Fifth Month) he had a second
dream on the same subject, in which he supposed his friend Joseph Wood was
about to go on a religious mission to the Continent, and he brought out
his Atlas to find the places for him. On being asked if he meant to
accompany him, he said he "was not prepared to answer at present." In the
relation of a third dream, which he had the next year (the 25th of the
Eighth Month, 1820), the locality to which his mind was attracted is first
indicated. "Pyrmont and Minden," he says, "rested very closely with me,
and to them I felt bound."

It might not have been worth while to have made allusion to these dreams,
which ought perhaps to be rather as the continuation or echo of his
thoughts than as their original source, but for the deep importance which
John Yeardley himself attached to them. He considered that by them was
first made known to him the divine will respecting his future course; and
that his longing desire to recover the name of the forgotten locality of
the first dream was answered in the last. It can admit of little doubt
that the same conviction of their more than common significance, which led
him to cherish as sacred the remembrance of these night-visions, helped to
form and sustain his resolution in carrying out the project with which he
connected them.

Just before the occurrence of the last dream, his faith in the heavenly
source of the invitation which, whether waking or sleeping, he had
received, to go over and help his Christian brethren on the Continent, was
confirmed by a prophetic message from John Kirkham, who, in the course of
his religious travels, again visited Yorkshire.


8 _mo_.--Our dear friend, John Kirkham, from Earl's Colne, Essex,
slept at our house on Second-day, the 7th, and had a meeting with our few
on Third-day. How wonderfully was he enlarged; and I could not but admire
how he was favored to speak to the states of some present. I could set my
seal to every word he uttered, and say, This is the very truth. Before he
left us he had a select opportunity in our family, and said a great deal
stout being faithful to our own vision. He seemed to answer a question in
my mind as fully as I had any right to expect; for I had almost asked it
as a sign that if I were not deceived in my vision he should be led to
speak on the subject. He said emphatically, "We cannot be faithful to the
vision of another man, we do not know it except it be revealed to us; but
we must be FAITHFUL TO OUR OWN VISION."

On the 9th I accompanied him to the Monthly Meeting at Settle, and I once
more desired that, if my feeling in former times had not deceived me, this
servant of the Lord might be led to speak on the same subject; and indeed
he scarcely said anything else but what had the strongest bearing on my
request. What encouraging favors do I receive at the hands of so good a
Master!


A few months later we find the charge to foreign labor renewed, with
intimation of the wide field in which he would have to work; an intimation
which was amply verified in his future travels.


11 _mo_. 26.--At meeting something involuntarily entered my mind like
this, I will make thee a preacher of righteousness to many nations. I felt
not only a desire to be made willing to be sent, but also a desire to be
prepared.


A few days after noting this impression he thus communes with himself on
this topic, which now began to absorb the greater portion of his thoughts.


12 _mo_. 3, _First-day_.--As I walked alone to the meeting this
morning, I thought within myself, What can be the cause that I so often
feel drawn in spirit towards the land of ----? My thoughts have now for a
long time past so frequently and so involuntarily revolved on the subject
that I begin to be very jealous over them, and to query whether it is the
workings of self-imaginations. If this is the case, O that I may be
relieved from them. But however unaccountable my feelings may be, a secret
love towards some unknown souls in ---- is so strong at times, that if I
had wings I should for my own inward peace visit them in body as I now do
in spirit. It seems as if my spiritual eye saw in those parts what we may
call a seed (the seed of the kingdom sown in the heart) that wants to take
root downwards and spring upwards, but which is almost choked with the
tares of superstition. Are there not scattered up and down in ----, many
whose souls are verging from under the clouds of thick darkness, and from
under the bonds of idolatrous superstition, towards that glorious liberty
which is brought to light by the gospel? Something in me secretly craves
an opportunity to tell those precious creatures that the time appears near
at hand when this glorious gospel light will shine so clearly that they
will discover a Saviour in the secret of their own hearts; and it is to
him (I could tell them) that they must look for the perfection of their
salvation. Should there be anything of the right savor in my heart
concerning this matter, I humbly hope that in due time it will be brought
to maturity, and my way made plain and easy--_plain_, so that I
cannot possibly mistake the pointing hand of divine wisdom, and
_easy_, so that when I hear the command I may be enabled to obey.

A very instructive time at meeting. The subject abovementioned glanced in
my view, and with it the Dover-failing objection, If I am at all "apt
to teach," can it or will it be required of me to leave those here and
others in this land who have need of instruction? This objection was
immediately answered in a way which I never before experienced. They
have, besides many teachers, the unerring light of Jesus in their own
hearts unto which they know they ought alone to look for direction. And if
they neglect or overlook the means in themselves, it is not in my power, a
poor instrument, to do them any good. So it may be said of others to whom
I may apprehend myself called. It all revolves on this single and
important point,--What is the _divine will_ concerning me? If I can
only know this and am enabled to do it, all will be well.


In the Autumn he attended Liverpool Quarterly Meeting, an occasion which
was one of the most memorable seasons of his life. His narrative of it is
very characteristic:--


9 _mo_. 19.--My dear wife and I left home to attend Liverpool
Quarterly Meeting. Through mercy we arrived safe there, but I, as usual
when from home, felt very low and poor in spirit, and was ready to call in
question my coming to the place. For although I received, as I thought, a
proper signal before I left home, yet one or two circumstances occurred to
discourage me from going, which I pressed through with some firmness;
however, such was my uneasiness the first night in Liverpool, that I was
very desirous, if my being there was in right wisdom, something might turn
up to convince me that I had not done wrong in leaving home. And blessed
be the name of Jesus, I had not been long in the first meeting (their
Monthly Meeting the day before the Quarterly,) before I was perfectly
satisfied. There were present Willett Hicks and Huldah Sears from America,
and Mary Watson from Ireland. In the early part of the meeting my mind was
engaged in meditating on--"God will enlarge Japhet and dwell in the tents
of Shem," and so it proved. The silence was broken by W. Hicks with these
words: "Great men are not always wise, neither do the ancients understand
wisdom." Others present were much favored, and the meeting ended in
heavenly harmony.

After it was over I found to my surprise and joy, my brother and sister
from Barnsley, whom I had expected to come to Bentham to accompany us to
Liverpool, and their not coming to Bentham first was one of the causes
which had discouraged me in leaving home; for I once had concluded, in my
wavering, to leave my going for their determination, thinking if they came
it would be the means of getting me off, if not, I should give it up; but
it so fell out that they took the nearest way to meet us there, without
writing us word, and it would have been a great disappointment had I not
been there. I should not have written so much about a seeming trifle but
to show the necessity of firmness in doing what is pointed out, unless
some reasonable cause prevents.

Now to the opening of the Quarterly Meeting for worship, which was like
the day of Pentecost, when the place was filled with a rushing mighty wind
from heaven. The first stream of ministry flowed again through W.H., who
appeared from these words: "In the last day, that great day of the feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink." It was indeed applicable; for all seemed athirst, and were invited
and admitted to drink of the waters of life freely; those who were afar
off drew nigh, and those who were near were enabled to acknowledge the
might of Him who had called them to his footstool, and crowned them with
his presence. Huldah Sears and Mary Watson were also much favored in
testimony. What opened on my mind to express was this: "God speaketh once,
yea, twice; yet man perceiveth it not." I thought we were bound to
acknowledge that our God still reigned in Israel, and was condescending to
speak to his people. Immediately afterwards M.R. appeared a long time in
supplication, and then H.S. both very powerfully; so that goodness seemed
to rise higher and higher, until we swam in divine life. This blessed,
heavenly meeting will be remembered by some to the latest period of time.


After this event John Yeardley speaks of being favored with more
enlargement of love towards the members of his small meeting; and also of
having, when attending a public meeting at Wray with Joseph Wood, to kneel
down in prayer for the congregation.


10 _mo_. 20.--To my humbling admiration, he writes, I had in the
conclusion to kneel down and call on the name of the holy and high God of
the whole earth, that he would be pleased to continue the blessing which
he had already condescended to pour down on our heads. This is a most
awful act of worship: I trust the intimation to it was attended with
proper weightiness of spirit.


This meeting was a remarkable season, and is thus described in Joseph
Wood's journal:--


_Bentham_, 10 _mo_. 20.--We [J.W. and James Harrison] set out
for Wray, our beloved friend John Yeardley being our guide. We called by
the way at Thomas Barrow's, of Wenington Hall, and drank tea; then
proceeded to Wray. There were but few Friends here, but they have a very
large ancient meeting-house, and my concern being principally towards the
inhabitants, and proper information thereof being given, abundance
attended; the meeting-house both above and below stairs was pretty well
filled; and their behavior was deserving of commendation. The Lord's
presence eminently crowned the assembly, and the truths of the gospel were
largely and livingly declared amongst them, and it was a time of
extraordinary favor to many. I had first a long testimony to bear therein,
from Luke iv. 41. A pretty long time of silence then ensued, and great was
the solemnity which appeared to cover the assembly. After which John
Yeardley stood up and said, Some were ready to say there was no worship
without words, but from the precious solemnity which he believed had
covered many minds since the former communication, he was ready to
conclude many were feelingly convinced to the contrary. He was then pretty
largely led forth in opening the advantage of silently waiting upon God. I
a pretty long time next, from Isaiah liv. 11,13. James Harrison next, from
Matt. xiii. 44. John Yeardley was next concerned in prayer. The meeting
held about two hours and a half.

21_st_.--About the middle of the day my companion (J.H.) called upon
me, and betwixt twelve and one o'clock we left here for Lancaster, Thomas
Barrow being our guide, and his wife, Charlotte Russell, and Emma Hodgson,
accompanying us. Emma Hodgson is the daughter of a clergyman of Rochdale:
she had been some time on a visit at Thomas Barrow's and went with the
family to the meeting at Bentham when we were there, and was much reached
and tendered therein; and attending the meeting at Wray last evening she
declared after her return that she was fully convinced of the truth.


Returning to John Yeardley's diary for this year, we find some passages
from which profitable instruction may be gathered.


11 _mo._ 8 was the Monthly Meeting at Settle; my dear love and I both
attended. To me it was a poor low season; if there were any good, I was
too much like the heath in the desert,--I knew not when it came. In
addition to this, it felt as if I had to mourn over the barren state of
some others. O, how I dread the state of a lukewarm Quaker! May I ever be
preserved from this sorrowful state of a lukewarm Quaker! I believe it is
often the means of bringing a damp over our solemn assemblies.

12 _mo._ 7.--_Query._ What is the most likely means for me to
adopt to approach nearer to holiness? _Answer._ To spend more time in
retirement silently to wait upon God. The more conversant I am with him,
the more I shall know of his will and receive power to do the same. To do
the will of the Almighty is the way to perfect holiness. The nearer
acquaintance we cultivate with him, the stronger will become the ties of
his affection. The more devoted we are to him, the more confidence will he
repose in us.


Catching then a glimpse of the glorious calling of the Gospel minister, he
breaks forth in the following strain:--


If I am ambitious in anything on earth, it is to be eminently useful in
His cause. I can say with the wise man, I ask neither riches nor honor,
except the honor which cometh from doing the will of God; but I do ask for
"an understanding heart." I trust I can say in the deepest sincerity that
I could renounce, if they were in my power, the riches and honor of ten
thousand earthly worlds in purchase of a double portion of that holy
unction which rested on Elisha's spirit. These are bold sayings, but my
Saviour tells me that as there is no limitation to his goodness to grant,
so there is no limitation in asking of him for the gift of his Holy
Spirit. But then what manner of man ought this to be on whom shall be
conferred such great honor! Surely it must be left to Himself to prepare
the vessel before he pours in the oil.


We have already made an extract from the diary of the 3rd of the Twelfth
Month in connection with John Yeardley's call to visit Germany. The same
diary supplies us with the description of a spiritual opening for the
benefit of others with which he was favored in the same meeting.


In my minute for First-day last I mentioned its being an instructive
meeting to me. Towards the conclusion a simile of this kind arose and
spread before my view: As wax when melted by the fire or the candle is
then only capable of receiving the impression of the stamp put upon it, so
also are our minds only capable of receiving impressions of divine good
when our spirits are melted and contrited before the Lord. As these
seasons are not at our command, it appeared to me to be of the highest
importance for us to endeavor to preserve and improve them as the best
means of testifying our gratitude to the great Donor. The impression which
the above contemplation made on my spirit proved like a morsel of bread to
my soul, which I found I could not conceal, though I struggled hard to eat
it alone, it seeming so insignificant to hand to others; but at length I
gave up, and felt it to be a time wherein some among the few present were
melted as wax before the fire, and had a portion of divine goodness afresh
imprinted on their minds; and my spirit craved that they might not prove
as "the morning cloud and as the early dew that goeth away."


On the 7th of the Twelfth Month Elizabeth Yeardley was suddenly prostrated
by an alarming attack of illness, from which, however, she soon rallied,
though she never entirely regained her previous state of health. Possibly
her husband alludes to this afflictive occurrence in the following
memorandum:--


12 _mo_. 10.--How varied is our passing along in this vale of tears!
First-day last was a day of brightness, and this day has been one of
comparative death and darkness. I have been made to know something of the
saying recorded by the prophet,--"Who is among you that feareth the Lord,"
&c., "that walketh in darkness and hath no light." This has appeared to be
my portion this day, and I find it hard work to "trust in the name of the
Lord and stay upon my God."


Some further remarks in his diary for this day turn upon the subject of
the ministry, and the passage he quotes shows how deep and heart-searching
is the work of preparation for an enlarged and effectual gospel ministry,
whatever be the denomination among men to which the preacher belongs:--


In the course of reading the life of Mary Fletcher I find much deep
instruction and encouragement. Many of her remarks have proved like a goad
to spur me on in the way of holiness. An extract made by her from Dr.
Doddridge's life aptly speaks the language of my heart, when in my silent
breathing to the Almighty I am led to crave an enlargement of my gift in
spiritual things:--

"There must be an enlargement of soul before any remarkable success on
others; and a great diligence in prayer and strict watchfulness over my
own soul previous to any remarkable and habitual enlargement in my
ministry; and deep humiliation must precede both."


1821.--The first entry in the diary of this year turns upon the
ever-present subject of his going abroad, and is penned under feelings of
the deepest solemnity. It is followed the next day by another on the great
duty of self-examination.


1 _mo_. 2. This day I have felt singularly impressed with a desire to
be more devoted to my Maker. I believe it is his will that I should be
more given up to serve him; and if spared with life and strength, my few
remaining days must be spent in his cause. A presentiment of this kind has
for some time past prevailed with me; and from the calm, awful, and
weighty manner in which it is at times brought over my spirit, I am
induced to think it cannot be the mere phantom of the imagination. The
prospect of a temporary residence on the ---- seems rather to increase
than otherwise. How it may terminate, or the time when to move, is yet
uncertain to me. O, how the prospect humbles me! I trust I can, in some
degree say, with the good old patriarch, that his God shall be my God, and
if He will only give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, I desire to
serve him.

1 _mo_. 3.--This day I am thirty-five years old. Whether I may be
spared as many more, or whether I may only survive as many months, weeks,
days or hours, as I have now lived years, is altogether in the breast of
Him who has hitherto preserved me as a monument of his mercy. How awful
the consideration! To think that we may be called to give an account at
any hour of the day, and not frequently to examine the state of affairs
between us and our God, is complete infatuation. Strange as it may seem,
as it regards myself I stand condemned. I am sensible sufficient attention
is not paid to the important work of self-examination. O that this fresh
year may produce fresh vigilance!


In the Second Month, Ann Jones, accompanied by her husband and Isabel
Richardson, visited Bentham on a religious mission. Ann Jones had much
service, both in public and private. What she had to declare to John
Yeardley in particular was very remarkable, and reminded him of the
discourse of Sarah Lamley in 1814. He says;--


She said a good deal which so struck home to my feelings, that I have not
been so deeply reached in the same manner since dear Sarah Lamley visited
families at Barnsley. (_Letter to his brother._)


In the Third Month he found it to be his duty to attend some meetings of
Friends in going and returning from the Quarterly Meeting at Leeds. In his
diary of the 14th of the Third Month he speaks of making the necessary
application to the Monthly Meeting for its sanction, and, in that and some
succeeding entries, records his feelings on the occasion, and the help
which he received by the way.


This was new work to me; how I was humbled before I could be made willing
to mention my concern to my friends! which was done in such a faltering
manner that I believe many sympathized with me. When I had received the
meeting's approbation, I was thoughtful how I should get most conveniently
on my way. After our meeting I received a letter from dear S.S., saying
that he had felt a prayer raised in his heart, that I might be helped in
my undertaking by Him from whom best help comes, and that he was most easy
to propose accompanying me on my way in his gig. A very agreeable
companion he proved to be, and for this little act of dedication he shall
not lose his reward.

I left home on First day, the 25th, for Newton, over the Fells. There fell
much rain the day before, which swelled the waters so that my wife and I
became very thoughtful how I should get over the river to Newton, over
which there is no bridge. I thought that should I be favored to get over
safe and dry I would take it as a sign for good in the journey; and so it
was in mercy granted; for when I came to the water-side, I met a man on
horseback who let me ride his horse over. This was in a wild part of the
country, with not a house near. Simple as this may appear to some, I could
not but acknowledge in it a providence for which I was thankful.

At Newton, where I expected to meet only three or four, more assembled
than the larger end of the house would hold. I was met by dear D.W. from
Stockton; I could not but think we looked like two poor striplings before
a great army. I should have sunk under my fears, had I not been enabled to
get down to that Power which can bear up above the fear of man.

In the afternoon I went to Thornton, and sat down with the family. This
was a precious season, and it felt doubly so from our having been on the
barren mountains, both literally and spiritually.

I went next morning, accompanied by D.W., to Lothersdale. This was also a
good meeting: I had reason to believe the God whom I was endeavoring to
serve had answered my prayer in sending his angel before to prepare the
way; I seemed almost borne off my feet by the power of Divine love.

We dined at S.S.'s; and after dinner I could not quit the room without
expressing what I felt towards him, which melted us all into tears. S.S.
joined me, and we went to Skipton to be at the meeting at five o'clock.
Before we came there I felt such a sense of poverty that it seemed as if
my spiritual life was going to be taken from me; and even when I got to
meeting, the same feeling remained, which introduced my spirit into a
state of suffering not easily to be conceived. On our sitting down I felt
there was something on the mind of S.S., and I feared lest, by suffering
the reasoner to prevail, he should be unfaithful; but he expressed a few
words which seemed as the key to the treasury.

I went that evening to Addingham, and had a meeting next morning, where I
sensibly found a little strength: we seemed to sit under our own vine and
fig-tree, where none could make us afraid. We lodged and dined at our kind
friend J. Smith's, in whose family I had something given to me to minister.


From Addingham they went to the Quarterly Meeting at Leeds, where John
Yeardley received intelligence of the sudden decease of his beloved friend
Joseph Wood. J.W. had been engaged in testimony and supplication in the
meeting at Highflatts on First-day morning, and was taken unwell during
the evening, and died in a few hours. After the Quarterly Meeting John
Yeardley went to attend the interment, and on his way had a meeting with
the Friends at Barnsley.


It was, he says, a favored time, and we were humbled and instructed
together. We went to Highflatts to tea; when I got to the place where the
remains of my dear friend were laid, I stood silently by the coffin in
tears, saying in spirit, If it be thy mantle I am designed to wear, may I
receive it with humility, reverence and fear! This feeling awfully
impressed my mind, because my dear friend had said more than once to me,
If I have any place in the body, I bequeath it to thee. The meeting was
very large and was a precious season; the occasion on which we were met
seemed to give wings to our spirits to fly upwards.


This spring Elizabeth Yeardley's disorder began to assume a serious form.
A short memorandum from her hand discloses in a touching manner her state,
both physical and spiritual.


3 _mo_. 29.--"Regard not distant events: this uneasiness about the
future is in opposition to the grace received." This sentence from my old
favorite, Fenelon, was much blest to my spirit this evening, when I had
foolishly been thinking about future sufferings. O, sufficient for the day
is the evil thereof. Perhaps a few rolling suns may, through the merits
and mercies of my Lord, see this poor worm translated to his Paradise.


The first direct allusion to anxiety on her account which appears in her
husband's diary bears date the 5th of the Fifth Month. Her debilitated
state seems to have been the cause of their deferring to a future day
their contemplated removal to Germany, which was otherwise to have taken
place about this time.

In the summer of this year he was himself laid for some weeks upon a bed
of sickness, with a complaint of the stomach. He viewed this time of
suffering as profitable in assisting his resolution to undertake the
religious mission to which his mind was still continually directed. In a
letter to Thomas Yeardley, of the 1st of the Ninth Month, he says, "Such
is my stubborn will that I am not to be effectually pleaded with, until I
am brought down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, or judgment." His wife,
who was too ill to leave her chamber, has a memorandum respecting her
husband's illness, under date of the 29th of the Eighth Month. It seems to
have been the last which her pen ever traced.


Since I wrote, my dear husband has had an awful attack; but the Lord has
again been merciful in restoring him to ease once more. Yesterday (may the
Lord enable us to keep covenant) we laid our _Isaac_ on the altar. O,
to be wholly our kind, our Heavenly Master's, who cares to provide for us,
for soul and body; who takes nothing from us but what he knows would harm
us, and gives us a hundred-fold of that which is good in lieu.


Prior to this time John Yeardley had not confided to his brother the
thought which so long had occupied his mind. In the letter just referred
to he speaks of it as "an important concern which had long been the
companion of his secret thoughts by day and his visions by night,"
and says:--


It now seems to be approaching so near a state of maturity that I feel
freedom to communicate it to thee.

For about three years past I have had an increasing apprehension that it
would be required of me to take up a _temporary residence_ among
those who profess with Friends on the other side of the water,
particularly with the few in the neighborhood of Minden and Pyrmont, and
probably at some time with those in the South of France. But my visit is
likely to be paid in a way different from any that have been made before.
I have never seen that the nature of my concern would require any document
from the Quarterly or Yearly Meetings; neither do I think it would answer
my present views; because the secret language of my heart has been for
many months past, "Go dwell among them, go dwell with them."

I should be in want of some employment, and the first thing that presents
to my view is to offer my services to a few of my friends in the yarn and
flax trade; articles which are largely imported into Yorkshire, and which
seem to be the natural production of the country, within the circle where
I should be likely to reside.


His brother's answer to this letter was most consoling and encouraging: in
reference to it he says, it seemed with him as it was with Peter in the
prison, when the angel smote him and the irons fell off.


And O, he adds, that I may be willing, now that a little light begins to
shine, to gird myself, bind on my sandals, cast my garment about me, and
follow my Lord, thinking no hardship too much to endure for so good a
Master. (_Diary, 9 mo. 21_.)


Although in reality not far from her end, his wife's state had not as yet
excited immediate alarm. On the 23rd of the Ninth Month J.Y. writes:--


My precious E.Y. is yet so weak that there is a probability of its being
an obstacle in the way of our removal; but there is this consolation,--if
the work be of the Lord he will not frustrate his own design; if it be not
his doing we must submit to have the whole overturned.


In a few days he became aware of her critical state.


9 _mo_. 29.--The indisposition of my dear wife has taken such an
alarming turn that I yesterday began to have serious apprehensions as to
the issue. I have watched with her night and day, and my prayers have been
unceasing for her restoration, I trust not without a due reverence to the
divine will. But I did not feel as though nature could give her up until
yesterday, when as I stood retired by the bed-side of my dear lamb,
endeavoring to feel after resignation, I gave her up as fully as human
nature, through divine aid, was capable of. Then it sprang in my heart,
Where is the man that can offer up an Isaac? He shall go for me, and I
will send him. There seems a spark of hope that even now, when the knife
is lifted up, the voice may yet be heard,--"Lay not thy hand upon the lad,
for now I know that thou fearest me."

My precious dear has been to me in my late exercise a never-failing
instrument of strength, comfort, and encouragement: in general her faith
has been much stronger than my own. Should it please Heaven to restore
her, O that there may be an increased desire that it may be for no other
cause, but that her heart, her hands and her feet, may unite with mine in
sounding forth our Redeemer's praise, if required, even to the ends of the
earth.


The following entries record the last hours of the dying Christian wife,
and the feelings of her bereaved husband:--


10 _mo_. 25.--Last night we expected my dear lamb would have sunk
away. How the awful event is to terminate is known only to Him on whose
bosom I trust she has always rested; for in no other place could she be
preserved in the state of peace which she appears to possess.

29_th_.--A most awful morning; my dear lamb is no more! She sweetly
fell asleep in the bosom of her Saviour, at one o'clock this morning. The
closing scene was perfect ease and peace. From the first of her illness
she seemed aware how it would terminate, and was perfectly resigned.
During our being at Bentham she has often said it was a place provided by
Providence to afford her that religious retirement she had long desired,
and which she took the most scrupulous care to improve. When in health she
would tell me of late that perhaps she might be taken away in order to set
me more fully at liberty to do the Lord's work.

11 _mo_. 18.--This day two weeks was the solemn ceremony of
committing to the silent dust the remains of my very precious and dearly
beloved Elizabeth. I had dreaded the day very much; but through prayer,
mixed with a degree of faith, which was mercifully granted, I was
wonderfully supported. In the meeting I felt the divine influence so near,
and so to prevail over my spirit, that I was constrained publicly to thank
the Father of mercies for his goodness.

This day I visited, perhaps for the last time, the place which encloses
the cold relics of one so dearly beloved; and as I stood weeping over the
grave, it sprang in my heart, She is not here but (she) is risen. What an
unspeakable consolation to be enabled to leave the dust behind, and hold
sweet communion and converse with the spirit. Ever since her departure it
feels as though her spirit had never left me, but was hovering and
fluttering around me to administer comfort on every afflicting occasion;
and O, saith my spirit, that this precious feeling may remain with me for
ever.

12 _mo_. 20.--I feel to lament the loss of my dear lamb more than
ever, at least so far as I dare. No one but myself knows the comfort which
the late awful event has deprived me of; but I no sooner remember the hand
which administered it than all complaining is hushed into silence, and I
am made to rejoice that she is so safely deposited where trouble cannot
reach.


From this moment John Yeardley felt himself quite free to pursue the path
of duty which had been opened before him, viz., to go and reside in
Germany.

In the Eleventh Month he left Bentham to sojourn awhile with his brother,
and on the 9th of the First Month, 1822, he received a certificate of
removal from Settle Monthly Meeting, addressed to the Friends of Pyrmont
and Minden, which certified that he was a member of the Society of
Friends, and a minister well approved by the church.

Before we pursue further the sequence of events, two passages from the
diary may be here transcribed, which could not have been inserted in the
order of time without interrupting the narrative. The first of these
conveys a lesson of practical wisdom, and exhibits the method by which the
writer was able to succeed and to excel in what he undertook. It is the
true comprehension and resolute acting upon maxims such as these, which
makes so much of the difference between one man and another.


1821. 7 _mo_. 2.--No man can excel in everything; therefore it is
highly important for each mind to consider attentively for what it is
calculated, and what end it is designed to answer by him who created it.
As secular affairs are often more expedited by a judicious arrangement,
than by hard doing indiscriminately at the mass; so will undertakings of
superior importance be more advantageously attained by keeping a single
eye, and looking for best direction to make a proper selection of what
ought to be done and what ought not to be done. I was long too much
wavering on this head, to my great loss; but I now hope it is become a
settled point, find I have clearly seen for what service I am designed in
the church militant here on earth; therefore, through the assistance of
divine grace, I hope to pursue nothing but in subordination to this main
design. For a little mind to aim at great things would be to thwart the
whole; but to endeavor to be faithful in small things, seems to be the way
to attain the end.


From the other entry we shall extract only a few words, but they are words
fraught with deep instruction:--


9 _mo_. 7.--"Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." Without
purity of heart we cannot see the pointing of the Divine Finger.


On the 18th of the Second Month, John Yeardley attended Pontefract Monthly
Meeting, held at Wakefield.


It was, he says, a precious season; I felt my friends very near to me in
spirit, and expressed to them in tenderness and love what lay on my mind;
and in the conclusion the power and goodness of the Most High were so
awfully felt that I could not forbear kneeling down to offer him thanks,
and to supplicate that he would he pleased once more to bind up the
breaches in the walls of our Zion, and grant that when we were separated
one from another we might never he separated from his presence.

I now begin, he continues, to feel very anxious to set forward for my
destination on the other side of the water. What an awful situation mine
appears to be! O that faith and patience may be granted equal to the
occasion!

1822. 2 _mo_. 26.--I never read in my dear lamb's diary but it feels
to season my heart with good. It is as though her writings were
impregnated with a degree of sincerity and resignation which, were so
eminently the characteristics of her innocent spirit. O, I repeat it, that
my precious Saviour may be pleased to appoint her angel spirit to be my
guardian through life, until I shall be joined with her in heaven and
we both unite in singing his praise.


About this time his brother, Thomas Yeardley, began to exercise the
ministerial office.


3 _mo_. 3.--Attended Woodhouse Meeting, which was to me a very trying
one. My brother Thomas spoke the feeling of my heart in something like
these words:--"They come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit
before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do
them."

3 _mo._ 18.--This day was held the Monthly Meeting at Barnsley. The
Testimony concerning our much-esteemed friend Joseph Wood was read and
signed by the meetings at large. When I consider the legacy, so to speak,
which this dear friend used to say he should bequeath to me, this language
seems to prevail in my heart:--"Moses my servant is dead; now therefore
arise. As I was with Moses, so I will he with thee; I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee."--Joshua i. 2, 5. This is an awful consideration; but
why should any despair? May not the faithful mind say, "This God is our
God; he will be our guide, even unto death." I desire most sincerely to be
kept in humility, whatever the probations may be which are necessary to
fit me for the design of Him who hath given me life, breath and being.


On the 2d of the Fourth Month he quitted Barnsley, accompanied by his
brother Thomas.


I think it a favor indeed, he says, to be relieved from a doubting mind as
to whether I should go or stay; for I can truly say that, let the result
prove what it may. I go with an undivided heart.

Elizabeth Dell had a meeting at Pontefract this day, where I met her; it
was a very satisfactory meeting, and it was pleasant to meet with several
Friends here whom I did not expect to have seen again. The parting
opportunity with E.D. has left a savor on my mind which I hope will not
soon be forgotten.

Before he left England he opened negotiations with several mercantile
houses, who gave him orders for linen yarn from Germany. At Hull he
writes:


4 _mo._ 12.--My detention here, waiting for a fair wind to Hamburg,
has not been unpleasant; my friends are exceedingly kind, but my feelings
in a religious sense have been rather depressing.


His heart was full of serious thoughts in anticipation of the voyage,
which was then more formidable than it is now; but the joyful hope of a
glorious immortality, if death should be suffered to overtake him, bore
him up above his fears.


14_th_.--May I be preserved in a holy reliance on the Arm of strong
Power for help. "O Lord God, who is a strong Lord like unto Thee, or to
thy faithfulness round about Thee? Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when
the waves thereof arise, Thou stillest, them." O may it please him to
carry me in his bosom, and protect me from the dangers of the sea. But
should it please him to permit that I go down to the bottom, may I be
fully resigned in humble confidence that I shall again arise to shine
brighter with him in everlasting glory. Amen.


We shall conclude this chapter with a few extracts from Elizabeth
Yeardley's letters, which well depict her character and experience; and
with a copy of the weighty and pertinent testimony regarding Joseph Wood
which was issued by Pontefract Monthly Meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *


7 _mo._ 13, 1818.--The broad way seems more and more crowded, while
the road to Zion is thinly scattered with poor wayworn travellers; each,
or nearly so, of the former living as if there were to be no hereafter,
and earth was to be their eternal home. I have thought that as our Blessed
Redeemer's arms were extended wide on the cross to embrace perishing
sinners, so do these short-sighted mortals extend their arms and their
wishes in grasping unsubstantial vanities, and that craving one of
_Mammon_, the most fascinating of all, as it increases with age.

9 _mo_. 24, 1819.--I hope by what I have felt of the keen arrow of
adversity piercing the heart, it will teach me, when I see it wounding any
of my fellow-mortals, to endeavor to soothe, if I have nothing else in my
power towards healing the wound. Let thee and me be determined, in the
name of the holy Jesus, to follow him and not look on others. He is
leading us into the pure green, ever green, pasture of humiliation, where
the sheep of his pasture love to lie. I own the road is not very pleasant;
the descent is rugged, and many times the poor traveller is ashamed of
being seen hobbling down by his former acquaintance; but when once within
the sacred enclosure, the sweet air that breathes humility hushes all
stormy passions to rest. I read and read again of all those holy folks
being divested of self, and anxiously do I desire to be so too, but by the
marks they lay down I am very far from that attainment. However, He who
said, Let there be light, and there was light, can add this to the rest of
his inestimable blessings showered on my unworthy head.

4 _mo_. 14, 1820.--We are sometimes led to expect pity from people
where we think we have a sort of claim, and here we often feel
disappointed. Persons at ease cannot feel for the sensations of pain in
others, any more than prosperity can feel the seasons of adversity.
Couldst thou have a look into the houses and bosoms of the inmates of most
in B. or other places, thou wouldst find a something sorrowful, a burden
the possessor would be glad to be quit of. Let us, then, go forward with
hope, and endeavor to be truly thankful for the many mercies showered on
our heads, who have not rendered as we ought that gratitude so greatly His
due. O look at the bulk of the population in England, whose children are
looking up to them for a meal, and they have it not for them; and then let
the tear of thankfulness fall. To be thankful is to feel a spark of
heavenly flame; to be thankful is to increase the blessing already poured
forth. O that I possessed more of this blessed spirit; for truly it is
angelic!

       *       *       *       *       *


_A Testimony of Pontefract Monthly Meeting concerning_ JOSEPH WOOD,
_deceased_.

This our esteemed friend was born at Newhouse, near Highflatts, within the
compass of this Monthly Meeting, on the 26th of the Fourth Month, 1750.
His parents, Samuel and Susanna Wood, members of our Society, were
concerned for the best interest of their children. In his youth he gave
way to some of the vanities incident to that period of life, but when
approaching manhood he was happily brought under the restraining power of
Truth, and often humbled in deep inward exercise. Once being in the fields
in the night season, he exclaimed, Lord what shall I do, or whither shall
I go? The answer in the secret of his own heart was as intelligible as if
spoken to his outward ear,--Whither wilt thou go, Have not I the words of
eternal life? Soon after this he attended a neighboring meeting, when a
ministering Friend, who was a stranger, stood up with the words which he
had received as an answer to his inquiry, and enlarged upon the subject in
a manner suited to his tried state of mind.

In the year 1779, in the twenty-ninth year of his age, was his first
appearance in the ministry, in great fear and broken-ness of spirit: but
being obedient to the manifestations of truth, he experienced an
advancement therein, and was a good example, adorning his profession by a
circumspect life. His testimony was not with the enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power. Neither was he
forward to offer his gift, patiently abiding in the deep till he felt the
holy fire burn. He was at times led in a plain close manner to the
unfaithful professors of truth, but had the word of consolation to the
rightly exercised, unto whom he was indeed a nursing father. He was
especially useful to such as the Lord was gathering from the barren
mountains of an empty profession to the knowledge of the truth, and he was
frequent, in solemn supplication for these, and for the awakening of those
who were at ease in Zion. His heart being enlarged in gospel love, he was
anxious for the salvation of all, and was frequently engaged to appoint
meetings amongst those not in profession with us. For this service he was
eminently gifted, and his ministry on these occasions was often attended
with the powerful baptizing influence of the Spirit, to the convincement
of many. He was concerned to impress on the minds of his friends the
necessity of a due attendance of week-day meetings, believing that such as
were negligent in this duty never experienced an attainment to the state
of strong men in the truth. That our dear friend was zealous for the
proper support of discipline in our religious body was sufficiently
evident from the part he took in the exercise of it in his own Monthly
Meeting; for active service in this important branch of church government
he was eminently gifted.

In the course of his religious labors, he visited the meetings of Friends
generally in most of the Quarterly Meetings in England, and many meetings
within the principality of Wales; and divers of them repeatedly.

During the latter period of his life, feeling his bodily strength decline,
he was anxiously desirous that no service required of him should be
omitted. His zeal increased with his years, and he became more abundant in
labor for the promotion of the Christian cause. In a memorandum made about
a year before his death, he writes, "This day I attained the seventieth
year of my age. May the remainder of my days be so devoted to the Lord's
service, as, when the solemn message of death is sent, I may have nothing
to do but to render up my accounts with joy!" In the last Monthly Meeting
he attended, he expressed amongst us that he had seen in the vision of
life that day, that there were of the youth there present those who, if
they were faithful and kept in their innocency, would become instruments
of good, and finally would shine as the stars, for ever and ever.

The day before his death, the first day of the week, he appeared in his
own meeting at Highflatts, in a powerful testimony, beginning with these
words of Moses to Hobab: "We are journeying unto the place of which the
Lord said, I will give it you. Come thou with us, and we will do thee
good; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel." In the course of
his testimony he had in strong terms to urge the necessity of a
preparation for an awful eternity. In the afternoon of the same day he
complained of a pain in his breast and arms, but was not considered in
danger. He retired to bed at his usual hour; but he slept little, and
quietly departed about five o'clock the following morning, the 26th of the
Third Month, 1821; and was buried at Highflatts the 31st of the same;
(many Friends and others attended the meeting on this solemn occasion,
which was eminently owned by the presence of the Great Shepherd of
Israel;) aged seventy-one years, a minister about forty-two years.




CHAPTER IV.


HIS FIRST RESIDENCE IN GERMANY.

1822-24.

John Yeardley left Hull on the 14th of the Fourth Month, and arrived at
Hamburg on the 21st. For the purpose of attending the Exchange, and of
becoming acquainted with the language, he hired a lodging in the
neighborhood of the city, where he remained for some weeks. Writing to his
brother, under date of the 23rd of the Fourth Month, he says,--


In the neighborhood of Hamburg, lodgings are not easily obtained for so
short a time as a month. We succeeded in procuring a room three miles from
the town, at Eppendorf, in the house of three young women, sisters. It is
a charming walk, mostly over the fields. It is quite a cross for me to go
on 'Change; but as it is the only place for information, I must submit to
it, my visit to this place being for instruction in the language and mode
of conducting business: but, from what I have yet seen, it will be quite
the best for me to proceed into the interior of the country in a few
weeks.


What his reflections were when he found himself actually an inhabitant of
the land where for so long a time he had mentally dwelt, will be seen by
the following entry in his Diary. The maxim with which it concludes may be
said to be the motto which he inscribed on his shield for the remainder of
his life.


This morning I am thankful to feel something of a peaceful serenity to
cover my mind, and am well contented in being placed on this side of the
German Ocean. I consider it an unspeakable blessing that I do not feel so
much as a wish to return, until the time may come that I can see clearly
that it is right for me so to do. Should I not be favored with health and
strength to do what I have sometimes thought designed for me before I set
my foot in this land, or should my Heavenly Father see meet to cut short
the work in righteousness and not permit that I ever see my native country
again, his gracious _will be done_. I leave this as a testimony that
none need to fear his rightly sending forth those who ask and rightly wait
for his counsel. I do not know why I should thus write: I trust it
proceeds from a resigned heart; and I will add, for fear I should never
have another opportunity, that I should wish all to know who have known
me, that I have no reason to doubt the rectitude of my crossing the water
with a prospect of a residence in this country, and that should time with
me now close, I die in peace with my God, and in that love for mankind
which believes "every nation to be our nation, and every man our
brother."--(6 _mo._ 8.)


The next day's diary consists of a short but earnest prayer.


_First-day morning,_--O, gracious and most merciful Father, be
pleased to strengthen my hands for the work that is before me; be pleased
to give me the power of speech; be pleased to give me thy word, with
power to publish it to those whose hearts thou shalt be pleased to prepare
for the reception of it.


The family with whom he lodged at Eppendorf strongly engaged his religious
sympathy.


I spent, he says in his diary of the 8th of the Seventh Month, about nine
weeks at E. in a very agreeable manner with the family of three young
women. The one who is the mistress of the house is very seriously
inclined. She told me she had read a play-book giving a description of our
Society in the character of one of its members, and ever since she had had
a particular desire to see one of us, and that she could not but admire
with thankfulness that she had been gratified in having one to reside
under her roof. She had heard of Thomas Shillitoe's being in Hamburg; and
when I told her he was now in Norway, she asked me his business there, I
told her that our Friends had sometimes a desire to visit their brethren
and other religiously-disposed people in foreign lands, and that such was
his errand. She replied, "Yes, and I believe it is also yours: this is
Gospel love indeed; while so many here will not think for themselves, you
come so far to visit and help them." In saying this she was overcome with
tears.


John Yeardley left Hamburg on the 2nd of the Seventh Month, and arrived at
Pyrmont on the 5th. Writing to his brother, he says:


I have now had a specimen of German travelling. Thou wilt be sure I was
very bold to set off quite alone except the driver, but it proved far
easier than I had anticipated. Instead of having a conveyance to seek when
I got over to Harburg, there was a man on the steam-packet who offered to
take me in his carriage, and the whole of my packages, to Pyrmont.

A great part of the country between Harburg and Hanover is very dreary and
barren, much resembling Bentham Moor; but the road is much worse, being in
many places not less than eighteen inches or two feet deep in sand. When
we came near Celle and Hanover, the country became quite different, being
very fruitful, and the prospect charming. Nearly all the way from Hanover
to Pyrmont it is beautiful travelling, and the road mostly good. Pyrmont
and the scenery in the surrounding neighborhood is beautiful beyond
description.


At Eppendorf he had been cheered by a visit from Benjamin Seebohm and John
Snowdon, from Bradford, who informed him that a committee from the Yearly
Meeting were on their way to Pyrmont. This was to him most welcome news,
and the Friends reached Pyrmont almost as soon as he did; but though their
company was so cordial to his mind, their presence did not relieve him
from the burden of religious exercise which he began to feel on behalf of
the members of the Society in that place, as soon as he took up his
residence amongst them.


_Diary.--7 mo._ 16.--The Committee from the Yearly Meeting--viz.,
Josiah Forster, Joseph Marriage, and Peter Bedford--have visited the
families of Friends here, and attended the Preparative Meeting which was
held on First-day last. Things here appear to be very low every way among
those who profess with us; yet there are a few sincere-hearted to whom I
already begin to feel closely united in spirit.

From the time of my arrival until First-day last, I do not remember ever
to have been more oppressed in mind. I could, if I dared, almost have
wished myself in England again, for I feared I should not be able to
obtain any relief. I went to meeting on First-day in fear and trembling;
but, as is sometimes the case, it proved better than I had expected.
When we are stripped of all help but what comes from the Lord alone, it is
then that he delights most to help us. Through the acceptable assistance
of my friend B. Seebohm, I was enabled to communicate what came before me,
and the great dread which I had always had of speaking through an
interpreter was mercifully removed, for which I was truly thankful. The
three Friends were favored most instructively to labor in the meeting for
business. They are now gone to Minden; I feel tenderly united to their
spirits in much love.


John Yeardley's residence was at Friedensthal, a hamlet about a mile from
the town of Pyrmont. In a letter to his brother he thus describes the
situation of the place, and his own comfortable accommodation:--


My mother inquires as to my mode of living, and if I have comfortable
accommodations. Please to tell her that I am provided for in a way which
is exceedingly agreeable to me. I have a large airy sitting-room with
three windows, and a bed-room adjoining, situated, on one side, under the
shelter of a wood, and the other opens to a beautiful and romantic dale.
The mode of cooking is just as I would wish it; I am only anxious
sometimes that my very kind friends of the house are too much concerned
for my help and comfort. It seems scarcely possible to find an outward
situation more suited to my wishes. When I have studied in the house, I
take my books in suitable weather into the wood, and there walk and read
and think. It is true I am sometimes very flat for want of company; but if
I incline to go to Pyrmont, they are always pleased to see me, and would
willingly have me always with them.--(2 _mo._ 17, 1823.)


Very soon after his arrival at Pyrmont, John Yeardley entered into active
service in behalf of the gospel. In what religious state he found the
people towards whom he had so long been attracted in spirit, and how he
was enabled to preach to them the word of life, is exhibited in several
entries in his Diary.


7 _mo._ 21.--The Two-months' Meeting was held at Minden; I went,
along with several of my friends from here. The first sitting was very
large, many coming in who do not usually attend. It was a very solid
meeting; I thought there was the good savor of an honest-hearted few to be
felt among a mixed multitude. Such was the sweet, peaceful satisfaction I
felt after this meeting, that I almost said in my heart, This is enough to
repay me for setting my feet in Germany. These are precious seasons, yet I
always recur to such in fear, and rejoice with trembling; for in the midst
of the Lord's goodness to his children one seems to be falling on one
hand, and another on another; so that the language seems to be, "Will ye
also go away?" and truly we shall never be able to stand if we look not
for help to Him who has the words of eternal life.


About this time Thomas Shillitoe arrived in Germany, in the course of his
religious visit on the Continent; and John Yeardley, on his return to
Pyrmont, united with him in a visit to the families of Friends belonging
to that meeting.


8 _mo_. 13.--My feelings are this morning deeply discouraged. I am
entering on a visit to the families here with my dear friend T.S., whose
company I have had since the 23rd ult. This service is to me a very
important one. It is an easy matter to say to a brother or a sister, Be
comforted, be strengthened; but it is no light matter to dip so feelingly
into the state of our fellow-mortals, as to feel as though we could place
_our_ soul in their soul's stead, in order that they might be
strengthened and comforted.

8 _mo_. 20.--The visit has been got over to our great satisfaction.
In some sittings, deep exercise and mourning; in others, cause of
rejoicing over the precious seed of the kingdom, which is alive in the
hearts of some. There seems to be a remarkable visitation once more
extended, especially to the youth.


In conjunction with Thomas Shillitoe he proposed to the Friends, as only
one meeting was held on First-days, to have one in the evening for
religious reading, holding it at Friedensthal in the summer, and at
Pyrmont in the winter. The proposal was immediately complied with, and the
institution proved a valuable auxiliary to the edification of the members.


8 _mo_. 25.--The reading meeting this evening has been a precious
season; O, how all spirits were melted together! May the blessing of the
Lord rest upon this humble endeavor as a means of bringing us nearer to
himself.

28_th_,--Our English Friends [Benjamin Seebohm and John Snowdon] have
taken their departure. I feel a little solitary, but I think it a great
favor to be preserved from a wish to go with them; nothing will do for me
but entire resignation to the Lord's will and work. Little did I think
when I left my home in England, that a work of this sort awaited me in
Germany; indeed, I came blind in the gospel; I knew nothing; but now I see
such a field of labor if I am faithful: how shall it ever be accomplished?
O, prepare me, dearest Lord, for without thy heavenly hand to assist me I
must faint. O, may I ever seek thy counsel; and be thou pleased to lead me
step by step, and give strength according to the day.

29_th._--To-day I have for the first time expressed a few sentences
in broken German in our little meeting. I do not know whether they might
be very clearly understood, but I hope the attempt to do what I conceived
to be the Lord's will, will be accepted by him. O, that he may he pleased
to give me the power of speech!


In the Ninth Month he went to Hanover with Thomas Shillitoe, who had a
concern to see the authorities regarding the observance of the First-day.
They did not meet with much success in their object; but they made the
acquaintance of Pastors Gundel and Hagemann, the latter "nearly blind and
very grey, but truly green in the feeling sense of religion," and who
rejoiced in his heart to find a brother concerned to reform those things
which had long laid heavy on his mind.

The two friends travelled together to Minden, where they parted, and John
Yeardley returned to Pyrmont by Bielefeld.


The neighborhood of this town, he says, is remarkably fine. There is a
very high hill, partly formed by nature, and partly by art, from which we
can see quite round, without any interruption, even into Holland. Here,
from the appearance of the bleach-grounds, I could fancy myself in
Barnsley. But, as Sarah Grubb says, I can have no pleasure in fine
prospects; my mind in these journeys is always too much exercised with
matters of a more serious nature.


In the latter part of the month John Yeardley went again to Minden, to
unite with Thomas Shillitoe in a visit to the families of Friends. They
commenced their visit at Bueckeburg, where they had a remarkable interview
with the family of the Kammer-rath Wind, which is related at length in
T. S.'s journal (vol. i., p. 388).

The place which seems in these visits to have engaged J.Y.'s sympathies
the most strongly was the village of Eidinghausen.


We had, he says, a very favored meeting in the room where their meeting
is usually held. In the sitting in the evening, with the family where we
lodged, many of the neighbors came in, who seemed to have no wish to leave
us. I thought of the words of the dear Saviour, when seeing the multitudes
he had compassion on them, because they were as sheep having no shepherd.
Truly these have no outward shepherd who cares much for their spiritual
interests. I felt my heart much warmed in gospel love towards them, and we
invited them to give us their company again next day, which most of them
did. In this meeting there was something expressed so remarkably suited to
the states of some present, that after it was over a woman confessed it
had been as was declared, that she herself was one to whom it belonged;
and she gave us a short relation how it had been with her in former days.

The love which these simple, honest-hearted creatures manifest towards us
does away with all distinctions and the difference of language. O, that He
who teaches as never man taught may be pleased to guide them and bring
them to himself that there may be one shepherd and one sheep-fold. All our
toils in this weary land will not be too much if we can he made the
instruments of helping only one poor soul on its way Zionwards.

10 _mo_. 8.--I returned yesterday evening from Minden, with a
thankful heart, to come again to my quiet and romantic habitation in
Peacedale. The strong fortifications which are made, and now making,
around Minden, give it an appearance of gloom and oppression which is
scarcely to be borne. O, how uncomfortable do I feel when within its
walls; but in its neighborhood there are a few friends to whom I am
tenderly united in spirit.


He concludes this entry with an allusion to the homely and even hard
manner of life to which many of these were accustomed.


To some of our Friends in England who are dissatisfied with their outward
situation, I would say, Come and see how these live on the Continent.


The 29th of the Tenth Month was the anniversary of his wife's death. His
diary for this day is an affecting transcript of his feelings on the
occasion.


The shock which my earthly happiness received this day twelvemonths has
been, this evening, piercingly renewed in the recollection of almost every
minute transaction which accompanied the awful event of the closing
moments of my precious lamb. For truly like a lamb she lived, and was well
prepared to become an angel-spirit. O, happy spirit, thou art at rest;
then why should I mourn thy loss? Surely He who knows the weakness of our
frame will forgive, for he himself gave us the example in weeping over
those he loved. The Almighty has been very good to me; he has put it in
the hearts of those with whom I reside to care for me with an affectionate
interest. O, for greater diligence, that the day's work may keep pace with
the day. What shall I do, but pray for more strength to be made able to do
all that may be required of me. I never saw the advice of our dear Saviour
more necessary for myself than at the present time, "Be ye wise as
serpents and harmless as doves."


Soon after this he had a return, of his complaint in the stomach, which
caused him to exclaim--


We are indeed but dust and ashes; how quickly the slender thread may be
cut, and reduce this frail tabernacle to that state of earthly composition
from which it was formed. But the spiritual part in us must have an
abiding somewhere _for ever_; this is the awful consideration which
ought continually to affect our hearts. Is it not a strange infatuation to
rank the moments of affliction among the evil events of our lives, when
these may prove the very means of bringing back our wandering feet to the
path which leads to everlasting life?


He then reviews his own situation, his calling and his work.


It is often the consideration of my heart, What has brought me into this
country? what have I done? what am I doing? and what have I to do? The
enemy is not wanting to distress my poor mind on the point of these four
important queries. But to the first I can answer, An humble submission to
what I believe to be the leadings of Divine Wisdom. To the second, through
the assistance of never-failing love, I have done what I could and have
found peace. To the third, I am desirous through divine aid to do what I
can; and to the fourth, which refers to the future, I must commit it into
the hands of the Judge of the whole earth, who alone is able to guide my
feet in the sure path. I feel in the present moment desirous to keep
eternity continually before my view, and to let outward things hang more
fully on the dependence of Him who suffers not a sparrow to fall to the
ground without his notice. (11 _mo_. 30.)

12 _mo_, 1.--The reading meeting this evening has been a precious
time. Our spirits have been much tendered in reading some account of the
lives and deaths of our worthy Friends recorded in Sewel's History. Tears
so overpowered the reader and the hearers, that the reading was at times
obliged to be suspended until we had given relief to our feelings.


In addition to this meeting, John Yeardley established another for the
young, to be held on Fourth-day evening, "in which they might improve
themselves in reading, and acquire a knowledge of the principles of the
Society, with other branches of useful information." The young women were
to bring their work; and it was his delight to interrupt the reading with
religious instruction, and such remarks as a father makes for the
improvement and gratification of his children. We see him here for the
first time in a character in which he was well known to the present
generation in various parts of England, viz., as an instructor and guide
of the youth. In noticing in his Diary the formation of the Youths'
Meeting at Pyrmont, he comments with pleasure on the innocent cheerful
manners of his audience, and on the advantages which might be looked for
from this kind of social intercourse.

The last entry in this year records an occasion of near approach to the
throne of grace in prayer in the little congregation at Pyrmont.


12 _mo_. 29, _First-day_.--A most remarkable season of divine
favor in our evening assembly. The awe which I had felt over my spirit the
whole of the day, and not feeling freedom to break my mind in the meeting
in the morning, induced me to look to the evening opportunity with fear
and trembling, which indeed is always the case when I feel the Master's
hand upon me. The most solemn act of worship, that of public supplication,
so powerfully impressed my mind, that I believed it right to yield to the
motion, which I humbly trust was done in due reverence and humility of
soul. Our spirits were so humbled under feelings of good that it seemed as
if the secrets of all hearts were presented before the throne of grace, to
ask forgiveness for former transgressions, strength to serve the Most High
with more acceptance, and to be finally prepared to reign with him in
glory. O how these seasons of refreshing will rise up against us in the
great day of account, if we are not concerned to improve by them! Grant,
dearest Father, that I may experience a nearer and stronger tie to do thy
will more perfectly; and let it please thee to remember those in this
place and this land for whom my spirit so often secretly mourns and prays.


The Diary of 1823 opens with a profound and solemn reflection.


1823. 1 _mo_. 4.--For want of faith we are too much inclined to serve
ourselves before we are willing to serve the Great Master, thinking we may
be able to do much for him afterwards, when it will more accord with our
situation in life. But, alas! this time may never come; if we thus put by
the _acceptable season_, our lives may close with our only having
performed very imperfectly the part which had been designed for us in the
Church militant. Painful would be the sting when appealing to the Judge of
the earth, in a moment when we no longer possessed the capability of
serving him, should the declaration be, Thou hadst a desire to serve me
when in health and strength, but thou wished _first_ to _serve
thyself_. My time was not then thy time, therefore _thy time_ is
not now _my time_.


A letter to his brother, written in the summer of this year (6 mo. 9),
gives a description of the mode of bleaching in use in Germany, which
will, we believe, be interesting to the English reader. John Yeardley
says:


Wilt thou not be surprised when I tell thee that I am about to commence
yarn-bleaching? Thou mayst be sure there is a pretty certain prospect of
considerable advantages, with not much risk, to induce me to make the
attempt. The advantages are threefold--safety, expedition and cheapness.
The first consists in the simplicity of treatment and safety of the
ingredients, no chemical process being made use of; the second arises from
the heat of the climate; the last is easily accounted for from the low
price of labor and the cheapness of the raw material, which is produced in
abundance in the neighborhood. In the country around, for a very
considerable distance, almost every family make their own linen; they grow
or buy the flax, spin the yarn and get it woven, and either bleach it
themselves or send it to others who have better conveniences in water, &c.
As the spring commenced, I noticed these little bleaching-plots wherever I
went, and often wondered that the color was so good. Knowing that such
people could not possibly be at any great expense or risk in the
operation, I concluded it must be done by dint of time and labor,
supposing that the yarn and cloth must lie at least a few months on the
grass; but, on inquiry, I was surprised to find it was made quite white in
three weeks or a month. To make a further proof, I sent two bundles of
yarn to two different places to bleach; it is now returned of a very good
color and perfectly strong, though it has been in blenching only a month
and two or three days, and although the greater part of the Fifth Month
has been unfavorable for bleaching. As to any risk of the yarn being
tendered, it is quite out of the question; it seems to be done by the
operation that nature points out. I have found a very convenient place For
the purpose of making trial; there is plenty of good clear water. There is
a prospect of having honest workpeople, and at very reasonable wages--not
more than 6_d_. or 8_d_. a day; there are many honest creatures
to be had at these wages who have nothing in the world to do.

From the first of my leaving England, I had no expectation of being
liberated from this country before the expiration of about four years, and
I have always been desirous that something should turn up that would
afford me support by suitable employment; so that what I have now in view
does not seem to clash with my former prospects. It is (he adds with
affectionate feeling) a source of great consolation that I can always
unbosom my mind so freely to thee; and I consider it among the greatest
blessings I enjoy, that thou hast never yet failed of being made an
instrument of support to me, and my prayer is that thou mayst never lose
thy reward.


Pyrmont is one of the oldest watering-places north of the Alps. The
inhabitants are very much dependent on the visitors who resort thither
during the three summer months, and amongst whom may frequently be
reckoned some of the first families in Europe. This year, 1823, the Prince
and Princess of Prussia (the present Regent of Prussia and his consort)
were there, and one Fourth-day morning attended the Friends' Meeting. The
meeting-house stands in one of the _allees_, and although its
position is not central, it is sufficiently public to be an object of
attraction to the curiosity of strangers. A memorandum under date of the
18th of the Sixth Month records the royal visit, and John Yeardley's
spiritual exercise on the occasion.


6 _mo_. 18.--To-day the young prince and Princess of Prussia, with
the Princess their mother, and the Hofmeister, have been at our Fourth-day
meeting. They entered with such seriousness on their countenances that I
felt my spirit suddenly drawn towards them in love, and a secret prayer
was raised in my heart for their everlasting good. Feeling the influence
of divine love to increase, I believed it right to kneel down, and in
brokenness of spirit I expressed what had opened on my mind, which
afforded me peace; and I hope good to others was imparted, although I may
say through the unworthiest of instruments. For truly I have for some time
been as in a state of death and darkness, owing to my unwatchfulness. O
what would I give for more circumspection, that I might be more prepared
to receive the _word_, and when command is given, publish the same.
But, unworthy creature, I often deprive myself and others of seasons of
good through my negligence and barrenness. When will the time come when I
can say, all earthly things are under my feet, and the cause of religion
and virtue rules predominant in my heart! Lord, hasten the day; and
preserve my feet in thy path in the midst of many snares; and rather let
me die than be suffered to do anything which would dishonor thy gracious
and holy Name, and the profession I am making of thee before the world.
Loose my bands, and enable me to say in sincerity of heart, I am willing
to serve thee freely.


With the cause for self-condemnation, which is alluded to in this entry
was no doubt connected the neglect to keep up his Diary; no entry occurs
for more than five months previous. It was probably much more difficult in
the position which he occupied in Germany to maintain a spirit of
watchfulness and self-recollection than among his more experienced Friends
in Yorkshire. There is an allusion to this in an entry of a little later
date.


7 _mo_. 8.--My mind feels a little more gathered than it has been for
some time past; but the little outward difficulties which are continually
arising have a great tendency to disperse the best feelings. I think it is
almost the greatest lesson that we have to learn, to stand so fast in
times of trouble as not to suffer loss. If we would so conduct ourselves
that the change of times and seasons should not have such an unfavorable
influence on our minds, this would be one great point gained; it would
enable us to meet the difficulties of the day in a better state to combat
with them.


But if daily trials abounded of a nature the most likely to retard his
spiritual progress, we shall see that He who had appointed his lot,
provided in his faithfulness the needful corrective, and by the discipline
of filial fear in the ministry of the word, kept him safe in his
sanctuary.

The attendance of visitors at the meeting-house was often numerous,
although it was seldom that they remained during the whole time of
worship. Meetings of this kind were very trying to John Yeardley's faith
and feelings; but sometimes they were seasons of heavenly blessing such
abundantly to make amends for past humiliation.


7 _mo_. 6.--To-day the small meeting-house and passage were quite
filled with strangers, and I was told many went away who could not get in,
and some remained under the windows. No creature on earth knows what my
poor mind suffers when I go to meeting under such circumstances. Many whom
curiosity brings in the expectation to hear words may some times be
disappointed, but I hope there are some whose intentions are sincere, and
who are desirous to be informed the way to Zion. I hope strength was
afforded me to preach Christ crucified. O that the Lord may support me in
these very trying seasons, and take from me the fear of man, and fill my
heart with a holy fear of offending Him whom I humbly trust I am desirous
of choosing to be my Lord and Master.

7 _mo_. 27.--"Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy name." Notwithstanding my many seasons of poverty and
inward distress, the foregoing language is sometimes put into my heart on
my return from our meetings, which are, in the bathing season, almost
always crowded with strangers. Their manner of coming in and going out
during the time of worship is exceedingly disturbing, and yet I cannot but
admire the stillness which prevails when anything is delivered. The help
which I at times experience in these trying seasons is wonderful in my
eyes. When I am concerned to stand up in His dread and fear, what have I
else to fear? This fear would always cast out the fear of man which ever
brings death; and yet so weak am I, that after all these precious helps
and comforting times, I tremble when the meeting-day comes again lest, I
should fail in doing the Lord's will. Such is my fear before I can rise to
my feet in meetings that I say with Samson, Be with me this once more that
I may bear testimony to thy name; then, if it be thy will let me die for
thee, and I will not think it too much, to suffer. O that He would be
pleased to enlarge his gift in my heart, and he unto me mouth and wisdom,
and give me tongue and utterance to declare his name unto the nations.

7 _mo_. 30.--Our Fourth-day meeting to-day has been a precious
heavenly season. Much more weightiness of spirit appeared to exist in the
strangers who attended, and consequently more stillness. I had not long
taken my seat before I believed it right to stand up with the words of the
apostle, "Awake to righteousness and sin not, for some have not the
knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame." The women's side was nearly
full of richly-clad females; they bore the marks of worldly distinction,
and were indeed as fine as hands and pins could make them. But the
tenderings of divine love reached the hearts of some among them in a
particular degree. I felt such a nearness of spirit towards them that I
had great openness in speaking of the things which came before me. After
meeting they very willingly accepted of some books. One of them was much
reached, and went into the little plantation to weep. Another went to her
to comfort her; but she replied, Go from me and leave me alone. We may
truly say with the apostle that God is no respecter of persons, but those
who fear him and work righteousness will be accepted of him, to whatever
nation, kindred, tongue or people they may belong. All distinctions of
religious sects and party spirit are laid aside when our hearts become
prepared to embrace each other in true Christian love. I do believe the
Lord's work is begun in the hearts of many in this land; and the fervent
prayer of my spirit is that he may be pleased to carry it on to
perfection, and that we may live to see the glorious day when
righteousness shall cover the earth as the waters cover the channels of
the sea. O Germany, Germany, what does my heart feel on account of thy
inhabitants! It seems as if I could tread thy soil for the remainder of my
days if I could only be made the instrument of helping on their way those
scattered ones who are athirst for the sincere milk of the word of life.

One of the females who visited our meetings came to the school room on
Seventh-day, and requested the favor of having a few books to peruse and
circulate. She said she was from Osnabrueck, and that there were a number
of people in that place who had a great love to the Friends of our
Society. Such opportunities afford the means of circulating a knowledge of
the truth to those whose hearts may be preparing to receive it; and if
such are only awakened to seek after the ways of holiness, although they
may never come to be of our number on earth, they will he found among the
number of the saints in heaven. The bathing-list this season already
amounts to 2500 persons, in which number there are many who are desirous
to inquire the way to Zion. It is much to be desired that the peculiar
advantages which Pyrmont affords for spreading in the different parts of
the Continent books illustrative of our religious principles should be
judiciously embraced, particularly as there appears such an openness to
receive them. I can truly say I have been thankful that my lot has been
here this summer, and I trust I have not flinched from doing what I
believed to be required of me.


In his letters to his brother, John Yeardley makes frequent mention of his
mother. In the Ninth Month he heard of her being seriously ill, and he
thus writes in reference to her state, in a letter elated the 29th of the
Ninth Month:--


The state of my dear mother's health is truly alarming; but as I have
received no further account from thee, I am flattering my poor panting
heart with a comfortable hope that she may have taken a turn for the
better, and will yet live to see the hour when we shall once more embrace
each other in my native land. If she should be taken away without my being
permitted to see her again, it would be a cup which I could not tell how
to drink. This brings poignantly to my remembrance one of the most trying
hours of my life, and yet the support then received was wonderful.

As I rode along the road in the course of this summer on a journey of
business, my dear mother was brought to my remembrance in such a very
remarkable manner, that I seemed to have a spiritual interview with her;
and she was brought so near to my feelings, that I thought it probable I
should never see her again until we met in eternity. I scarcely know how I
felt, but it was as if my spirit accompanied hers into the regions above.
I noted down the circumstance when I got home; for it had made such an
impression on my mind, that I should not then have been surprised to have
heard of her departure.[1]


The following instructive remarks occur in the Diary about this time:--


10 _mo_. 27.--My retirement and reading this morning has been more
tendering to my spirit than for a long time past. I read and considered
the institution of the Passover, when the Israelites were led out of
Egypt; and it appears clear to me that the sprinkling the door-posts with
the blood of the lambs, as commanded, was a type of our Saviour's blood
which was shed for our transgressions, and that we must be saved by his
becoming our paschal lamb. As the destroying angel only passed over the
doors and preserved those who had received the mark, so can we only be
saved by being willing to apply the blood of our dear Saviour to wash and
cleanse us from our sins. What a beauty there is in the connection of
Scripture truths when we read them with a simple heart prepared to receive
the right impression which may be opened!


The Friends of Minden and the little company of awakened people at
Eidinghausen, who on his first coming to Germany had taken so firm a hold
of John Yeardley's mind, continued to excite his religious sympathy, and
he again visited them in the latter part of this year.


(_Minden_.)--On Seventh-day last, the 1st of the Eleventh Month, I
left home in company with some of my dear Pyrmont friends to attend the
Two-months' Meeting, and to spend a few days with my dear friends of this
place. I lodge with Frederick Schmidt, and feel myself perfectly at home.
It is a most orderly and agreeable family, consisting of himself,
daughter, and housekeeper; and the time passes pleasantly away when I am
only enough concerned to improve the opportunities afforded by this good
man's company. He was one of the first in this place who was convinced of
the religious principles of Friends, and his beginning was small both in
temporals and spirituals. I cannot but admire how his endeavors have been
prospered. He remarked the other evening in conversation, that it was of
great advantage to the Friends to persevere in their outward callings, and
not to jump (us he expressed it) out of one thing into another. This would
be the means of establishing their credit as men of business.

11 _mo_. 7.--Sarah Grubb mentions[2] that when she visited Minden,
she met with great kindness and attention from a councillor of the place,
who on their leaving accompanied them a little way out of the town to an
inn, where he had provided coffee, and had invited a few of his friends to
take leave of them. This was at the house of my worthy host [Frederick
Schmidt], who then kept the inn at Kuckuk, and had for some time been
under deep [religious] impressions. He related to me that her discourse in
the meeting she had Lad in the town had affected him, and yet he could not
give her his hand, but went into the garden to weep; but after she had got
into the carriage and driven from the door, she suddenly made a stop, came
again into the house, and asked for him. He being called, she had a
remarkable opportunity with him; she told him she believed the Lord had a
work for him to do in this place, and that he would have to stand foremost
in the rank, and when the time came he must not flinch from doing what his
Master would require. This has in a remarkable manner been fulfilled to
the present day, and affords an encouraging example to the poor tried
servants of the Lord to be faithful to apprehended duty. Although they may
not live to see the effect of their labors, yet their Lord and Master will
not leave himself without a witness in the hearts of his people; praised
be his name.

14_th_. Since Thomas Shillitoe and I visited Eidinghausen, there has
been a remarkable revival to a sense of religion; a number come together
in a sort of society every First-day afternoon, to read, sing, and pray
for the edification one of another. As all things have a beginning, this
may perhaps prove a step to a more perfect way of worship. I had long felt
inclined to visit the meeting in Eidinghausen, and had looked towards
accomplishing it from Minden.

I went there on the 9th inst., and my intention to be there being known a
few days before caused many of these awakened people to attend the meeting
so that the little school-room was quite full, and many stood in the
passage. I was truly thankful to be amongst them, for it proved a most
satisfactory season. They are a rustic set of folks, but have each a soul
to save or to lose, and all souls are of equal value in the sight of the
Judge of the whole earth. Lewis Seebohm kindly gave up his time to attend
me as interpreter, for I still prefer help of this sort when it can be
done through one who is so feelingly capable. I often feel as a poor
wandering stranger in a strange land, and yet I dare not complain. The
goodness of the Lord is great towards me; he opens the hearts of those
whom I am concerned to visit, to receive me into their hearts and houses,
so that it affords me great freedom in speaking to them on serious
subjects relating to their best interests, both spiritual and temporal. I
am convinced if we mean to be useful to a people of a strange land, all
must be done in a spirit of love and humility; with the weak we must be
willing to become weak; only we must be on our guard and not flinch from
our well-known testimonies.


The reflection contained in the passage which follows is of deep
significance, and the lesson it conveys is one which the Church has as
much need to learn now as at any former period.


15_th_.--We find recorded in the writings of our ancient Friends that
occasionally a few words spoken in the course of common conversation made
a deep impression on the minds of those to whom they were addressed. The
cause must have been that they lived in a more retired state of mind, and
were consequently better prepared to feel the smallest of good impressions
in themselves, and were also more attentive to embrace every opportunity
of improving the minds of others. I fail in this respect; I do not live
enough in what may be truly called a spirit of prayer. I must be more
watchful over my thoughts, words and actions, and improve my seasons of
retirement; for there is no other way of preservation than by waiting and
praying for a renewal of spiritual strength.


John Yeardley then reverts, as he so often does, to the love of souls in
Germany, which was the means of causing him to leave his native land, and
which he says had not diminished during his eighteen months' residence
among them. To these thoughts he adds some considerations regarding the
temporal condition of the Society of Friends there, on account of which he
was often very solicitous.


The situation and welfare of the Society here have long occupied the
warmest feelings of my heart. I am of the mind, with other Friends who
have visited these parts, that there is a precious hidden work begun in
the hearts of many in Germany, who suffer under oppression, on account of
the many discouraging circumstances which have existed among them, and
which yet prevail, to the great hindrance of the Lord's work. There are
causes for which no human remedy can be prescribed. I have often said in
my heart, If the Lord help them not, vain is the help of man. Much has
been done for them by our dear Friends in England, and much still remains
to be done, in order that they may be preserved together and not become
dispersed as though they had never been a people.

The effectual means of help seems yet to fail,--that of putting the
families in the way of helping themselves by suitable employment. The
families who live in the neighborhood of Minden, mostly on small parcels
of land, have until now got on with a tolerable degree of comfort, by
cultivating their land in summer and spinning yarn in winter; but now the
depression is so great that if they could be put into the way of earning
threepence a day, they would embrace it with thankfulness. I have been
very diffident in proponing any plan for their assistance, knowing that
some former proposals have failed of accomplishing the end. But I have
consulted with those who are best acquainted with their situation, and we
think it safest for them to continue their own employment of spinning
yarn, and endeavor to mend their trade by placing it on this footing. They
must spin such an article as I can make use of in sending it, with what I
buy from other people, to my friends in the linen business in England. I
am to give them a little higher price than they can elsewhere obtain, and
those who have no flax of their own must have a little money advanced to
purchase some, which they must repay in yarn. When the yarn is disposed
of in England, and a profit on the same can be obtained, it must be
distributed among them as a premium to encourage industry and good
management in producing a good article. If this does not answer, I cannot
see any thing at present that will.


How far this scheme was put in practice we are unable to say, but we
believe it was not accompanied by any successful result.

In the next entry he speaks of the advantage which he derived from keeping
a diary.


11 _mo_. 17.--I was this evening accidentally induced to read over a
few of my former memorandums; and it humbled my spirit to retrace the
dealings of my merciful Father with me. I am glad that I have from time to
time penned down a few remarks by way of diary, although it has been done
interruptedly and very imperfectly. It proves a means of enabling me to
see a wonderful concurrence in the ways of Divine Wisdom which has led me
in a way that I knew not, and hitherto preserved me through the mercies of
his love: praise be to his Name now and for ever. Amen.


After his return from Minden he accompanied John and William Seebohm, who
were going on a journey of business to Leipzig. They went by way of
Brunswick and Halberstadt, and returned by Nordhausen and Eimbeck. In this
tour through the heart of Germany, John Yeardley made many observations on
the state of agriculture, the cities, and the character of the people. Of
the last they met with several curious traits, some of them sufficiently
annoying.


On many great roads, says J.Y., there is a summer and a winter way,
running parallel to each other, with a rail across, on which is a notice
that the way is forbidden by a fine of 6_d_. or 8_d_, for each
horse, that the traveller may know when to take the summer or the winter
road. We stopped on the way [they were not far from Wolfenbuettel] to give
our horses a little bread, and our coachman drove to the side of the road
to make way for carriages to pass. But he had inadvertently gone over the
setting on of the road; and the roadmaster came to us, and told us we must
not feed our horses there, as it was not allowed to drive over the stones
on the side, under a penalty of three shillings per horse. The evening of
the same day we fed our horses at an inn, and walked before, leaving the
man to follow us. I and my young friend W.S. sought the cleanest part of
the way by walking in the course made for the water, which was green and
clean; but so soon as we came by the inspectors, who are mostly employed
on the road, one of them told us we must mind for the future and keep the
right footpath, or pay 6_d_. each. This I considered as an
infringement of English liberty, and was ready to reason with him on the
subject; but I reflected that I was a stranger, and that it is always
better and more polite to submit quietly to the regulations of the country
in which we live, than bring ourselves into difficulty through incivility
or contention.


In returning from Leipzig, J.Y. and his friends committed a more serious
offence against the pragmatical regulations of the German States.


On our journey homewards we had much perplexity with some cloth, &c. which
J.S. had bought in Leipzig to bring to Pyrmont. This arose from want of
better information respecting the laws of the Prussian territory. They are
exceedingly strict as to duties. All kinds of wares are allowed to pass
through the country at what may be called a reasonable excise; but those
travellers who have excise goods with them must preserve a certain road,
called the Zoll-strasse. It was our lot to miss this road; for
apprehending ourselves at liberty to pursue what road we pleased, we took
another way. But we found our mistake when we came to the place where the
duty is paid; for we were informed we had taken the wrong road, and that
transit duty could not be received; we must either pay the full excise as
when goods remain in the Prussian territory, or return back until we came
again into the Zoll-strasse. It took some time to consider which was best
to be done. To be sent about we knew not whither, and on roads scarcely
passable, would prove a serious inconvenience; and on the other hand it
was exceedingly mortifying to pay for such a trifle so enormous an excise.
The officer was very civil, but told us it was not in his power to do
otherwise. We concluded it would be best and cheapest to pay dearly for
our error rather than be retarded on our journey. We had a regular receipt
for what we paid, but inadvertently departing again from the appointed
way, we were in danger of paying the full duty a second time, or having
the goods taken from us. So much for travelling with excise goods.


Early in 1824, John Yeardley returned for a few months to England. He had
ingratiated himself so thoroughly into the esteem and love of his Pyrmont
friends, that his departure even for a short time was the signal of
lamentation through the whole meeting. On the 11th of the First Month he
had a farewell meeting at Friedensthal, which was attended by almost all
his friends. With his parting blessing he had some counsel to impart.


I have so much place, he says, in their minds, that whatever I say, either
in counsel or reproof, is always received in love. Such a scene I never
witnessed; the dear lambs all wept aloud; we were indeed all melted
together. May the Shepherd of Israel never leave them nor forsake them,
and may they become willing to follow his leading. I can truly say that on
their behalf my pillow has been often wet with my tears.


On the 3rd of the Second Month, he left Friedensthal, accompanied by a
young Friend whom he was to conduct to a temporary residence in England,
and in whose religious welfare he was deeply interested. While waiting in
Hamburg for a vessel, he felt keenly his solitary situation in the world.


2 _mo_. 9.--I think I never felt poorer in spirit and more
discouraged than at present. It seems as if visiting my native land had no
cheering prospect for me. If it were right in the divine sight I could
almost wish to spend the whole of my life in solitude; but I must be
willing patiently to suffer, and endeavor to fill the place appointed for
me on this stage of action.


A vessel sailed for England the day before their arrival at Hamburg, a
circumstance which at first made him regret he had not used more
expedition on the way. But he immediately recollected it might he for the
best that he was left behind. This proved to be the case; for the vessel
with which he would have sailed, meeting with contrary winds and dark
weather, ran aground, and was obliged to put back, and when J.Y. left the
Elbe she was lying in Cuxhaven harbor.

They landed at Hull on the 19th.




CHAPTER V.


FROM HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND IN 1824, TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF HIS FIRST
CONTINENTAL JOURNEY IN 1825.

On setting foot again in England, the dejected state of mind which had
accompanied him on the journey returned with renewed force.


2 _mo_. 19.--I do not know how to describe my feelings in landing on
my native shore: I feel a poor discouraged creature. May He who knows the
sincerity of my heart be pleased to strengthen my poor mind, for I feel
almost overwhelmed with fears and difficulties.


Still deeper was his emotion on visiting again the home of former days.


2 _mo_. 20.--Left Hull, and came by way of Selby and Wakefield to
Barnsley. I felt my heart exceedingly burdened before I reached the place:
it seemed as if all the bitter cups I had drunk in former times were going
to be handed to me afresh. This may not be, perhaps, altogether on my own
account. There is at times a fellow-feeling with others; and on my
reaching this place, I soon felt my spirit dipped into sympathy with some
of my dear connexions, who are not without their trials.


A few days afterwards, in allusion to the religious service of Elizabeth
H. Walker of West Chester, U.S., in a public meeting for worship at
Barnsley, he says:--


I do not really know what is the matter, but I fear I am going backwards
from all that is good. When I look at the usefulness of others, O what an
insignificant, useless being I appear!

This lowly opinion of himself, however, was not to serve as an excuse for
idleness, and it was proposed to him to bear Elizabeth Walker company in a
religious circuit in some of the midland counties, previous to the
occurrence of the Yearly Meeting. He accepted the proposal; and they
travelled together through part of Staffordshire, Warwick, Worcester, and
Oxfordshire, visiting the meetings of Friends, and sometimes inviting the
attendance of the public.

The dispirited state of mind which John Yeardley had brought with him from
Germany accompanied him on this journey, and on the 30th of the Fourth
Month he writes:--


I walked last evening in the fields, in a solitary frame of mind, being
very low in spirits on many accounts. My own unfaithfulness deprives me of
strength to cast off my burden as I go along; consequently I grow weaker
and weaker, which is indeed diametrically opposite to growing stronger and
stronger in the Lord. Lamentable case! O for a alteration for the better!

_Fifth-day, the 6th of Fifth Month, at Sibford_.--This is a pretty
large meeting, and there are a good many sweet-looking young folks. The
lovely countenances of such are always refreshing to me, and it is not
much wonder if I have a little more openness for labor, winch was the case
in this place. But in general I sit and bemoan my own uselessness. I have
been a burden to myself in this little journey, in fearing I might be so
to my friends; but I ought to be very thankful that they do not seem to
think me so, but are desirous to encourage me. I think if it was
otherwise, it would be more than I could bear.


In the Fifth Month, he attended the Yearly Meeting in London. At the
Meeting of Ministers and Elders, an unusual number of certificates were
granted for religious service abroad. These various concerns drew from him
the following reflections:--


As I sat under the weighty consideration and disposal of these subjects, I
felt a degree of rejoicing to spring in my heart, that there are still
members who hold the promotion of the cause of righteousness in the earth
dear to the best feelings of their hearts. It is indeed cause of heartfelt
gratitude that the Divine Master is directing the feet of his messengers
not only to the borders of this isle, but also into distant parts of the
earth.

During the Yearly Meeting John Yeardley lodged at William Allen's, at
Plough-court and Stoke Newington, and was introduced to several Friends
with whom he had not before been acquainted.


The acquaintance which I have made with many dear and valued Friends in
the neighborhood of London has, I hope, been a little strength to me in
the best things. It is truly pleasant to be treated with such genuine
kindness; but it is nothing for the soul to build upon,--we must look for
a more sure foundation than the favor of the great and good.


Elizabeth H. Walker had a meeting with the younger part of the Society in
London and the neighborhood. In noticing this meeting J.Y. has some
discriminating remarks on the exercise of the ministry.


During this as well as many other meetings for worship, I sat under
religious exercise, but could seldom believe it required of me to take
part in the public ministry. I often think, when many exercised brethren
and sisters are present; there would be a danger of interrupting the true
gospel order, if all were not careful to wait on the Great Minister of the
Sanctuary. If we patiently abide under the rightly baptizing power, what
we may apprehend preparing in our hearts for utterance may often be
delivered by others, and we only have to say, as it were, Amen. We may
also be brought into a right willingness to speak in the Lord's name, and
still be excused; this may be, perhaps, a preparation of an offering which
may be called for at another place. O the importance of knowing the word
rightly to be divided, and when and where the offering is required!


A part of Elizabeth Walker's errand in coming to Europe was to visit the
Friends in Germany; mid it was proposed that John Yeardley should take
charge of her and her companion, Christiana A. Price of Neath, on his
return to Pyrmont. They went together through Essex and Suffolk, having
meetings on their way; but at Ipswich it appeared that C.A. Price's health
was unequal to the journey, and Elizabeth Walker proceeded to Hull to
cross the water from thence with another company of Friends who were bound
for the Continent. J.Y. was thus left to proceed alone to Pyrmont, and he
sailed from Harwich on the 19th of the Sixth Month. When in Suffolk he
went to Needham to see "dear ancient Samuel Alexander."


I had, he says, long known this fatherly man by name and person, but had
had no acquaintance with him until now: his company and conversation were
exceedingly pleasant and instructive to me. In the evening I took a walk
in a large plantation which he had himself planted when young, and had now
lived to see afford him a comfortable retreat.


John Yeardley was taken ill when in Suffolk, and on settling down again
in his quiet home at Friedensthal he writes:


7 _mo_. 15.--I am drinking salt-spring-water, and my health is
mercifully restored. The air of this country seems to suit my constitution
better than that of England. Time is very precious. I think, to keep a
more correct journal of what I do each day might be very useful, by
inducing a more narrow scrutiny how each hour is spent; for I know not how
many more may be allowed me to prepare for eternity.


To this resolution he did not adhere. With the exception of two short
entries in the same month, he wrote nothing in his diary for the remainder
of the year. The difficulties of his position, perhaps a lack of
sufficient employment, and the want of that instant watchfulness without
which the disciple is ever prone to stray from his Master's side, seem to
have again produced, as they did twelve months before, a season of
spiritual famine.

His own gloomy condition did not, however, altogether disable him from
sympathizing with others. In a letter to his brother of the 4th of the
Eleventh Month he says;--


I have of late been in such a low tried state of mind, that I have been
discouraged from writing thee, under an apprehension I should say nothing
that would afford thee any satisfaction in reading. But though I may not
have it in my power to relieve thee, I hope it will not be unpleasant to
thee to know that thou art still more dear and near to me than ever thou
wast in the times of more apparent outward prosperity. It is a high
attainment to know how to set a right value on perishable things, and it
requires no small degree of fortitude to bear the depression of apparent
temporary adversity, in that disposition of mind which becomes the
character of a true Christian. Although, according to our apprehensions,
the storm may last long, yet it most assuredly will blow over, and then
greater will be our peace than if we had never known a tempest.


On resuming his Diary, which he did in the First Month of 1825, John
Yeardley gives an account of the events which happened to him during the
previous few months.

In the Seventh Month 1824, Thomas Shillitoe and Elizabeth H. Walker came
to Pyrmont, and to the latter J.Y. gave his assistance in various
religious engagements. After her departure he again visited Minden, with
the neighboring villages of Eidinghausen and Hille. His visit to the
last-named place (1 mo. 13, 1825) was marked by a singular circumstance.


Finding a sudden draft [in my mind] to be at the reading meeting in Hille,
to begin at two o'clock, there seemed but little time; however, proposing
it to my dear friend John Rasche, he was quite willing to accompany me,
and driving quickly we came in due time. When the [meeting] was over, the
Friends told me they thought it very remarkable that we should come
unexpectedly on that day, and that what was communicated after the reading
was particularly suited to the state of a woman Friend present, who was
laboring under the temptation that she had committed the unpardonable sin,
and could find no rest day or night. I could not prevent them from
expressing their thankfulness for such a mark of Providential
interference, in this way to afford the poor woman a little relief and
encouragement.


Four days afterwards, having then returned to Friedensthal, J.Y.
adds:--"Since our visit to Hille, the person above-mentioned is dead!"

The depression under which John Yeardley labored, from the loss of that
comfortable presence of his Lord which had been almost from his youth as a
lamp shining continually upon his head, seems to have reached its lowest
point in the early part of this year. Under date of the 24th of the Second
Month he says:--


I have this morning once more been enabled to pour out my sorrowful spirit
before the Father of mercies in a way that has afforded me some relief and
encouragement. In bitterness, and, I may almost say, in agony of soul have
I spread before him some of those circumstances which have been a cause of
unspeakable distress to me for many months past, and rendered me unfit for
almost every service, temporal or spiritual.

Thou knowest, O gracious Father, I long to have my ways and steps
regulated by thy holy will. Therefore I beseech thee, have mercy on my
faults, and blot out from thy remembrance all my sins, and everything
wherein I have in weakness offended thee; and be pleased to give me
strength to become more perfectly and lastingly thine. O how sensibly do I
feel my own weakness, and that without thee I can do nothing, not for a
moment preserve my own steps.


In the midst of his discouragement his mind was directed towards the
accomplishment of another part of the commission which had been entrusted
to him before he left England.--viz., to sojourn for a time amongst the
Friends in the South of France. Accordingly, early in the Third Month he
went to Minden, and laid before the Two-months' Meeting, his intention of
going to Congenies for this purpose, and also of seeking a religious
interview with some serious people in the neighborhood of Cologne.


This information, he says, was received by my friends with much sympathy
and, I trust, weightiness of spirit, and I felt a little strengthened by
the expression of their feelings and unity with me in this concern. A
certificate of their approbation was ordered to be drawn up. No creature
on earth knows how this prospect humbles me. I always think I am dealt
with in a remarkable manner,--somewhat different perhaps from others.
Notwithstanding all the seemingly insurmountable difficulties which stand
in the way, and which are far too numerous to particularize, my peace is
connected with my obedience. What will be the result I know not; the way
appears not yet quite clear us to the time of departure. O Lord, favor me
to wait on thee for the spirit of discernment not to step forth in the
wrong time.


The obedience which he practised in committing himself in simple faith to
this religious prospect prepared the way for a temporal blessing, as well
as for the return of inward joy. He little knew, when persecuted by the
Accuser of the brethren, and mourning over the weakness of his own corrupt
nature, that his Lord was about to provide for him a congenial and helpful
companion, in the room of her whose loss had left him solitary in the
world. Without this timely sacrifice of his own will, it could not have
been so easy for him to make the journey to France in the way in which it
was done, and which was the means of bringing about the union which shed
so much comfort on the remainder of his life.

Between two and three months after the meeting at Minden, he received the
information that Martha Savory, accompanied by Martha Towell, was about to
pay a religious visit to the Friends at Pyrmont and Minden. He had been
introduced in London to Martha Savory as a minister of the gospel, and one
who had been abroad in its service, but his acquaintance with her seems to
have been slight.[3] On receiving this intelligence he writes:--


The prospect of seeing a few dear Friends from my native land would be
cheering, but I am really so cast down that I seem as if I could not, and
almost dare not, rejoice in anything. May this low proving season answer
the end for which it is permitted!


As he apprehended the Friends who were coming from England might require a
guide, John Yeardley went to meet them at Rotterdam. His journey, and the
singular coincidence of Martha Savory's concern with his own, are
described in a letter to his brother, written after his return from
Holland.


Friedensthal, Pyrmont, 7 mo. 14,1825.

MY DEAR BROTHER,

On my return from Holland I received thy long and very interesting letter.
Martha Savory and her companion Martha Towell are now acceptably with us.
They expect to spend two or three months with us, and then we have some
prospect of going in company to the South of France. As this has fallen
out in a rather remarkable manner, it may not be amiss just to explain it
to thee. We were entire strangers to each other's concern; but as soon as
my friends in London heard of my prospect from the copy of the minutes of
our Two-months' Meeting and of my certificate, dear William Allen wrote to
me desiring a more particular description of my views, time of departure,
&c., and mentioned at the same time M.S.'s concern, which had already
passed the Quarterly Meeting, and it was fully expected she would be
liberated [by the Meeting of Ministers and Elders] to visit Pyrmont and
Minden, and afterwards, if _suitable company offered_, proceed to
some parts of the banks of the Rhine, Switzerland, and Congenies, in the
south of France. I wrote to W.A., and explained to him my prospect, which
was to visit a few individuals in the neighborhood of Cologne and pass
through Switzerland to Congenies. I then received a letter from our dear
friend M. Savory, stating that she and W.A. had been much struck with the
remarkable coincidence in our views; our prospects being to the same
places and in the same way; and that it seemed in the pointing of Truth
for us to join in company.

Fifth mo. 26th, I left Friedensthal to visit my friends in Minden and its
neighborhood; and after spending about two weeks there, I felt very much
inclined to give our friends the meeting at Rotterdam. I set off,
accordingly, the 7th of the Sixth Month, and travelled seven days through
a desert country to Amsterdam, I went almost one half of the way by water,
across the Zuider Zee from Zwolle to Amsterdam. After spending a few days
in Amsterdam, I went, with J.S. Mollet, who is the only Friend in that
city, to Rotterdam, where we met with M.S. and M.T. Thomas Christy,
junior, had accompanied them, from London. M.S. had letters of
recommendation to many persons in Amsterdam, whom we visited; and though
some of them were first-rate characters in the place, it is surprising
with what affection and kindness they received us. J.S. Mollet accompanied
us to Pyrmont.


An account of his journey, both going and returning, is also contained in
J.Y.'s diary: it presents some additional notices which claim a place
here.

Before leaving Minden for Rotterdam, he twice visited Eidinghausen, and
saw some young men who were under suffering because of their refusal to
serve in the militia.


One in particular (he says, in writing up the diary), a sweet young man,
at this moment may be in torture. O, how I feel for him! My soul breathes
to the Almighty Father of mercies on his account, that he may he
strengthened to endure all with patience for the sake of his Lord, who has
given him a testimony to bear against the spirit of war and fighting.


At the conclusion of the second meeting at Eidinghausen, he says:--


The meeting was fully attended, and I afterwards dined alone in the
schoolroom with a light heart. I thought I could say, After the work is
done, food tastes sweet.


At Rotterdam, John Yeardley and his companions made the acquaintance of a
"very interesting missionary student, who believes he has a call to go on
a mission to the Greeks, and is waiting for an opening: his name is
Guetzlaff." At Amsterdam, a letter from Guetzlaff introduced them to the
priest of the Greek church in that city, Helanios Paschalides, a man of
child-like spirit, and long schooled in affliction, who had become
awakened to his own religious wants, and who believed himself called to
return to Greece and instruct his countrymen. These two interviews are
memorable, as being, probably, the commencement of the strong interest
which J. and M.Y. evinced in the Greek people, and which issued, years
afterwards, in a religious tour in that country. At Zeist, where there is
a settlement of Moravians, the ministers, finding the Friends desired to
convene their members in a meeting for worship, readily consented.


The meeting, writes J.Y., was more fully attended than we had expected.
There is much sweetness of spirit to be felt about these people, but a
want of stillness. I thought some of the hearers were prepared to see
further than their teachers, and the time may yet come when some may be
drawn into a more spiritual worship. We left them a few tracts, and they
kindly gave us a few little boots of theirs. It is remarkable in what a
spirit of love they received us.


The Friends reached Pyrmont on the 1st of the Seventh Month, and shortly
afterwards made a visit amongst the members from house to house in that
place, and at Minden. On the 28th they visited a number of seriously
awakened persons at Lenzinghausen, who felt the necessity of spiritual
worship, and to whom their hearts were much enlarged in gospel love.


Walking in the garden, writes John, Yeardley, in a very solemn and
solitary frame of mind before the meeting, I had such a feeling as I
scarcely ever remember to have had before. I thought I saw, as in the
vision of light, as if a people would be gathered in that neighborhood to
the knowledge of the truth. It appeared to me to be in the divine
appointment that our dear M.S. was come to visit Germany, and a large
field of labor seems to be appointed for her in this land if she is
faithful.


The next two months were occupied with various religious services, public
and private, not omitting meetings at Eidinghausen and Hille, where, as on
former occasions, J.Y. found his heart to go out towards the people with
strong emotions of Christian love. About 150 attended at the former, and
300 at the latter place.




CHAPTER VI.


HIS FIRST CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1825-6.

The time was now come for John Yeardley and Martha Savory to pursue their
journey to the Rhine, Switzerland and France. They left Pyrmont on the
11th of the Tenth Month, 1825, and beside Martha Towell, were accompanied
as far as Basle by William Seebohm as interpreter. Every member of the
party wrote in one way or other an account of the journey, and we have
availed ourselves of these various sources in the following narrative.

Passing through Paderborn, they arrived at Herdecke on the 13th. Regarding
his feelings in this place John Yeardley writes:--


This morning I was greatly dejected, and fearful we might find none of the
people whom we were seeking. As I was walking pensively outside the town,
I recollected what I once read in "Cecil's Remains,"--that a way may
suddenly open before us when we the least expect it. This was now to be
verified; for after we had entered the carriage with the intention of
going to Elberfeld, and while we were waiting for a road-ticket, I
accidentally fell into conversation with our hostess, and making inquiry
for people of religions character, learnt that there were a number of such
in the neighborhood.


The Friends alighted, and sent for a member of this little society who
resided in the town. He informed them that a meeting was held at Hageney,
about six miles distant, at the house of a pastor named Huecker. Being
disposed to visit this pastor, they took their informant with them as
guide, turned their horses in the direction opposite to Elberfeld, and
drove along a very bad road to his house. They found him occupied in
teaching some poor children. He told them that their visit was opportune
and remarkable, for that he had been denounced as a delinquent before the
Synod of Berlin, which had sent him a string of questions on doctrine and
church-government. He had returned a reply to the questions, and was then
waiting the determination of the synod, whether he was to be displaced
from his cure or not. The Friends examined his answers, and were well
satisfied with them: the worship which he and his little flock (about
thirty in number) practised was of a more spiritual character than that of
the national church. Martha Savory expressed her deep sympathy with him in
his difficult and painful situation, and John Yeardley also addressed him
in words of consolation and encouragement.

At Elberfeld, where they arrived on the 15th, they met with several
interesting persons. One of these, a young pastor named Ball, became
greatly endeared to them. He informed them that when he had been severely
tempted, he had found support and deliverance in silent waiting on the
Lord. Another was Pastor Lindel, who resided at some distance from the
city, in the Wupperthal; he had been brought up a Roman Catholic, had seen
many changes, and suffered not a little persecution. He took them to see a
neighbor, an aged man, weak in body, but strong and lively in spirit. This
man told them he was present at a meeting at Muehlheim held by Sarah Grubb,
about thirty years before; and that, although ninety years old, he
recollected the words with which she concluded her discourse: "By this
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another." This love, say the narrators of the occurrence, was felt amongst
us on this occasion, and at parting the good old man gave us his blessing.

They quitted Elberfeld on the 19th, and proceeded to Duesseldorf, where the
reception they met with was equally open and gratifying. They spent an
evening at Kaiserswerth with Pastor Fliedner, who was occupied in
vigilantly guarding a little nock of Protestants surrounded by
unscrupulous Romanists. He evinced much interest in the management of
prisons, and was endeavoring to introduce improvements in that of
Duesseldorf: he had met with Martha Savory in one of her visits at
Newgate.[4]

The next day they went to Duesselthal, and inspected the institution there.
The Count Von-der-Recke conducted them himself through every department.


His countenance, says John Yeardley, evinces the magnanimity and kindness
of his heart; it is remarkable and precious that so young a man should
dedicate his whole time and fortune for the benefit of the orphan and the
destitute.


At Creveldt, the next town where they stopped, Pastor Molinaar and his
wife, who were Mennonists received them in a very cordial manner: the
latter had seen Thomas Shillitoe at Amsterdam. J.Y. relates several visits
which these worthy persons and some of their Christian friends paid to
them at the inn.


22_nd._--In the evening Pastor Molinaar came, with his wife and some
friends, to tea. They inquired very narrowly respecting our principles.
Pastor M. turned the conversation on women's preaching, and, after some
explanation, appeared to be pretty well satisfied with our views on this
subject. The Mennonists hold strongly to the use of Water Baptism, and the
pastor and his wife defended this practice, the latter with much
earnestness. But when we had unfolded our sentiments, and William Seebohm
had read a passage from Tuke's "Principles," the pastor, seeing that we
aimed only at the spiritual sense, acknowledged that he had often queried
with himself whether the usage could not properly be dispensed with, and
said that he intended still further to examine the question. Our
certificates were then read; and after we had conversed on our church
discipline, the company separated in mutual love.


The Friends inquired of the Mennonists whether any of their Society would
incline to sit with them on the First-day evening.


Our friend, Martha Savory, told them we could not promise that anything
should be uttered, seeing this could only take place through the immediate
operation of the Holy Spirit. At the appointed time there assembled about
fifty persons. After a short conversation they seated themselves, and when
we had sat awhile in silence, M.S. found herself moved to address them in
a feeling manner, W.S. interpreting; and I relieved my mind in German as
well as I was able. Before we separated, Pastor Molinaar rose, and in the
name of the rest expressed his heartfelt satisfaction, adding that he
hoped we should remember them for good, as they should not fail to pray
for our preservation.

24_th._--We told Pastor M. that it would be agreeable if he and any
others of his friends who wished to take leave of us would come to the
hotel. At seven o'clock, instead of a few as we expected, there came about
thirty. The ladies seated themselves quite sociably, and took out their
work, but were evidently prepared to lay it aside in the hope of having
another religious sitting. But as we believed there were those present who
had come from too great a desire to hear words, we were on the guard not
to satisfy this excited inclination; and the evening was spent in
agreeable conversation. Before we separated, however, we thought it well
to read our Yearly Meeting's Epistle, which was acceptable to all. Pastor
M. especially was pleased with the part about church-discipline, and said
he considered it of real advantage that the epistle had been read in
that company, as there were several young women present who might receive
benefit from it.


Feeling attracted towards the inhabitants of Muehlheim on the Ruhr, the
Friends again turned out of the direct road and crossing the Rhine a
little beyond Duisburg, arrived in the evening at Muehlheim. They found a
company of Separatists in the neighborhood of the town, some of whom they
visited; and the next day they passed over the Ruhr, and, with the
assistance of a school-master, convened a meeting for worship. At the time
appointed nearly three hundred persons assembled, mostly of the poorer
class. They were seated in a large school-room, the men on one side and
the women on the other, waiting in silence. They had a good meeting, and
at the conclusion the auditory expressed their unwillingness to part, and
their desire that those who had ministered to them should visit them
again.

On the 27th, after calling upon some descendants of Gerhard Tersteegen,
our Friends proceeded through Duesseldorf to Cologne. They were
disappointed of finding in the neighborhood of this city, that company of
religious people on whose account they had felt much interested, and of
whom they had heard that "they held principles like the Quakers, and were
as obstinate in them as they are." They did no more here than call upon a
few serious persons in the city, and then went forwards to Neuwied, hoping
there to hear of them.

At Neuwied, besides becoming acquainted with the Moravian preachers and
others, they were called upon by some of the _Inspirirten_, who
invited them to their meetings. They attended one of these; but, being
dissatisfied with the manner of the service, and not finding relief for
their spiritual exercise, though the opportunity of speaking was offered
without reserve, they in turn invited the company to meet with them the
next morning after the manner of Friends. The meeting was held to mutual
satisfaction, and one of the leading men amongst the _Inspirirten_
expressed the hope that it would be blessed to them; for he was, he said,
sensible of the want of less activity and more of silent waiting in their
religious assemblies.

The society to which these people belonged divided in 1818 into two
branches, after an awakening which took place that year; those who
separated believing it to be incumbent upon them to lead more self-denying
lives, and dwell more closely under the influence of the Holy Spirit. This
new connection was the people of whom our Friends had heard; and they
learnt that they had retired to a place called Schwartzenau, near
Berlenburg, a small town at the eastern end of the barren hilly region
known as the Sauerland. The distance of this place from Neuwied is
considerable, and the roads amongst the worst in Germany; but John
Yeardley and Martha Savory apprehended they could not peacefully pursue
their journey without attempting to visit them.

Accordingly they left Neuwied on the 1st of the Eleventh Month, and
proceeded to Montabauer. The road led them at first amongst some of the
choicest scenery of the Rhine; but after a while they left the river and
struck into the interior of the country, in a north-easterly direction.
The next day they passed through a place where, a few months before, a
Diligence had been robbed. The robbers, who had been taken a fortnight
after the offence, were then, as they were informed, in Limburg gaol, and
were to be hanged the next day. They were ten in number, all members of
one family. At Burbach they met with an English landlord, thirty-five
years resident in Germany; he was delimited to see his fellow-countrymen,
and exerted himself to give them the best entertainment his house
afforded. The country they passed through was very hilly, and overgrown
with forest; now and then a solitary dwelling was seen in the bottom of
the deep valleys.

On the 3rd they came to Siegen, an ancient and antique town on the side of
a high hill, looking, as one of the party observed, as though they had
reached the end of the world. And, indeed, it seemed almost like the end
of the civilised world; for they were informed that the road from thence
to Berlenburg was in such a miserable condition that they could take their
carriage no farther. They resolved, however, to make the attempt, and
providing themselves with a tandem horse (_vorspann_) and a guide,
and sending on their luggage, they set forth on the way to Letze, a
village where they proposed to lodge; but the waters were abroad from the
overflow of the rivers, and the road being extremely narrow, and the ruts
deep, they made very slow progress. Sometimes the way was so impracticable
that they had to take the carriage through the woods which skirted the
road. Darkness and rain coming on obliged them to halt for the night at
Netphen, and seek shelter in the humble dwelling of a woman, who at first
took alarm at the unexpected appearance of so many strangers. The account
which the guide gave respecting the travellers dispelled her fears, and
she did what she could by hospitality to make up for the scantiness of her
accommodation. She gave them also some information respecting the
_Inspirirten_, whom they were on the way to visit, speaking favorably
of them. The next morning, before they started, they were able to offer
her spiritual good in return for her temporal kindness, John Yeardley
ministering to her condition under religious exercise; and they trusted
his words found entrance into her soul.

On the 4th they pursued their way, up hill and down, the carriage
sometimes becoming so firmly fixed in the narrow deep ruts, that it was
necessary to take out the horses, and for the men of the party, with the
assistance of passers-by, to lift it over to more even ground.

At length they arrived at Erndebrueck, and drove to an inn; but not finding
their luggage, they went to another, and while they were preparing to
start for Berlenburg, William Seebohm went to the Custom-office to show
the ticket of clearance they had received on entering the Prussian
territory at Burbach. This ticket should have obviated all delay attendant
on the examination of the luggage; but it happened, most unfortunately,
that the custom officer was the landlord of the inn they first came to.
Their leaving his house without taking refreshment was, in his eyes, an
unpardonable offence, and on William Seebohm presenting to him the ticket,
his countenance and language betrayed the passion which raged in his
breast. He declared their trunks should be examined in the strictest
manner; and when they represented the necessity they were under of
speedily pursuing their journey, and desired him to despatch the business
as quickly as possible, he replied by detaining them until they were
obliged to send back the horse and guide, and consent to pass the night
under his roof. He then demanded their passports, and finding they had not
been _vise'd_ at all the towns through which they had passed, and
that the travellers had departed from the route described in them, he sent
for a gendarme, and placed them under arrest. They were not allowed to
take anything from their trunks without being watched by the gendarme; and
when they took out a letter of recommendation, written by Dr. Steinkopf to
the clergyman of the place, whom they had requested to call upon them, the
gendarme insisted on first reading it. On their expostulating with the
landlord at being treated in this manner, instead of making a direct
reply, he strutted up and down the room, repeating continually, "Ja, ja,
ja, ja! they shall know what they went away from my house for, and that
there is a custom-office here." The Friends took their evening meal, as is
usual in Germany, in-one of the sleeping-rooms--that which had been
allotted to Martha Savory and Martha Towell. Into this chamber, when they
had eaten, the landlord brought a party of eight or nine men to take their
supper. After supper the men smoked, and some of them did not even refrain
from showing their ill-breeding in a more disagreeable way. William
Seebohm overheard the landlord and the gendarme say to each other, "These
people are travelling this way to visit the Separatists, and strengthen
them in their religious opinions; but we will disappoint them."

The next morning they were favored with a short season of solemn
communion, in which they were given to believe that the Name of the Lord
would be their strong tower. Their liberation, in fact, was near; for
their envious jailor, finding probably no excuse for longer detaining
them, suffered them to depart, but sent the gendarme to guard them as far
as Berlenburg. The man proved to be an excellent guide, and being eager to
bring them to the magistrate of that town, where they could be more
effectually checked in their schismatical object, he was very useful in
shouldering the carriage when they came to a stand in the miserable roads.

The town of Berlenburg presented a dismal spectacle, the greater part
having recently been burnt down; so that they had some difficulty in
making their way through the ruins. They were subjected to no delay at the
Custom-house, but, before being allowed to go to an inn, were conducted by
the gendarme to the Castle, to be examined by the _Landrath_, or
magistrate. While John Yeardley and William Seebohm were taken into the
justice-chamber, Martha Savory and Martha Towell remained in the carriage,
where they were presently surrounded by a crowd, who gazed with
astonishment at their equipage, no such vehicle having been seen in the
town for many years, and probably never any persons in such attire. Being
weary of waiting, and anxious to know the result of the examination, they
left the carriage and ascended to the magistrate's room. They were
politely received, and arrived just as he had concluded the examination
and was declaring the Friends entirely free from, the requisitions of the
law. The letters of recommendation which they presented were very helpful
in procuring this result. At the Landrath's request, they stated the
object of their journey, and the reasons which had induced them to deviate
from the route described in the passports, of all which he caused a note
to be taken. At the conclusion he politely dismissed them with the
salutation, "Go where you will, in God's name;" and the abashed and
disappointed gendarme was obliged to imitate his superior and make them a
parting bow. The magistrate referred them to two of the citizen, for
information regarding the Separatists, but remarked that he considered a
visit to Schwartzenau at that critical moment would not be without danger.

One of the persons on whom the Landrath recommended the Friends to call
was the Inspector of the Lutheran or State Church of the country; and on
the 6th, which was First-day, after a time of worship in their own
apartment, they received a visit from this personage. Wishing to act with
entire openness, they informed him of their desire to see the Separatists,
and invited him to accompany them. He gave them the names of several with
whom they might freely have intercourse. As the interview proceeded mutual
confidence increased, particularly after reading their certificates; and
the Inspector expressed himself gratified with the liberality entertained
by Friends towards people of other religious persuasions.

It snowed all the next day, and the roads were deep in water, so that M.S.
and M.T. remained in-doors; but J.Y. and W.S. walked to Homburgshausen, a
village about a mile and a-half from Berlenburg, to call upon an aged man,
a Separatist of the old connection. He had heard of their arrival, and was
overjoyed to see them; he looked upon it as a providential occurrence that
they should have been sent there at that juncture. His forefathers, he
said, had been settled there many years, and had hitherto enjoyed liberty
of conscience; but now he feared they were about to be deprived of that
privilege. Before the Friends left Berlenburg, he called at their inn with
several more of his society; he appeared to be a truly pious man, and
looked, they say, exactly like a _good old Friend_. He declared
himself to be fully convinced of the value of silent worship, but said
that their people in general were not prepared to adopt it; however they
rejected outward baptism, and the use of the bread and wine, and refused
to bear arms. He had been many times summoned before the magistrates to be
examined upon his religious belief. On one of these occasions the Landrath
asked why he did not take the bread and wine, and why he did not have his
children baptised. He answered that if he was to conform to these
ceremonies it would be as though he had received a sealed letter in which
nothing was written. He and his people were solicitous with the Friends to
have a meeting with them; but the minds of John Yeardley and his
companions were pre-occupied with a desire first to see the New
Separatists, who were then under persecution, and they did not think it
proper to accede to the request.

In reply to a message which they sent to some of the new society, they
received, through a young woman (for the men were afraid to come to the
inn), a pressing invitation to visit some of them who lived in a retired
spot called Schellershammer, not far distant. They immediately accepted
the invitation. The road, which was impassable for a carriage, was covered
with mud and water. They were received into a very humble dwelling by a
pious young man and his family, with whom also they found some of the New
Separatists from Schwartzenau. On. sitting down with this company the
restraining presence of the Lord was felt, under which they remained for
some time in silence. Then the poor people opened to them their situation
with humility and freedom. The young man above-mentioned had just drawn up
a statement of their religious principles, which had been sent to the
authorities. This statement he showed to the Friends, as also a letter to
the King of Prussia, which had been prepared by one of their ministers,
but which, from its lofty assumption of prophetic authority, they could
not approve. These people called their ministers, _Instruments_; and
they had fallen into the specious error of attributing to their effusions,
whether spoken or written, equal authority with the Holy-Scriptures. On
other points their principles resembled those of Friends; as the disuse of
outward ceremonies and of oaths, and their testimony against war. It was
on these accounts that they were persecuted. They appeared to dwell under
the cross of Christ, and to live in much quietness of spirit. Under the
existing circumstances the Friends did not feel bound to appoint a general
religious meeting with these people. They contented themselves, therefore,
with unfolding their sentiments in conversation, giving them books, and
before they left Berlenburg, addressing them by letter, in which they
enlarged particularly on the subject of the ministry. They also left some
copies of their Friends' books with the old society; and both parties
declared their belief that the visit they had received was in the order of
Divine Providence, and took leave of them in love and confidence.

The friends quitted Berlenburg on the 9th of the Eleventh Month, and
proceeded towards Frankfort. After a day's journey over bad roads, they
were glad to find themselves once more on the _chaussee_. They
arrived on the 11th at Frankfort, where they called on a few pious
individuals, but stayed a very short time in the city, being desirous of
visiting some Old and New Separatists at Lieblose near Gelnhausen, about
twenty-four miles from Frankfort.

The next morning they accordingly went to Gelnhausen, and had social
interviews with members of both associations, but failed to make use of
the opportunity they had of holding a meeting for worship with the Old
Separatists, which they afterwards regretted.

They then went forward to Raneberg, about six miles distant, to see the
_Instrument_ who wrote the letter to the King of Prussia which was
shown to them at Schellershammer. They found him a young man, inhabiting
an apartment in a lonely castle, romantically situated on a high hill. The
access to the spot was through a forest, and by a very bad road. Whatever
prejudice in regard to him they might have imbibed from the style of his
letter was at once dispelled by his appearance; his look was so humble, so
devoted, and with such "extreme sweetness of countenance." John Yeardley
and Martha Savory conversed with him a long time; he did not rightly
comprehend the nature of the Christian ministry, but he listened calmly
and patiently to all they had to say. They left some books with him, and
received some in return, descriptive of the awakening which gave rise to
the division in the society of _Inspirirten_. He was then about to
set out on foot to pay a religious visit to the members of his own
profession in various parts of the country; when at home he worked at his
trade, which was that of a carpenter.

The party retraced their steps to Hanau, and the next day pursued their
way southwards. They passed through Darmstadt and Heidelberg to Pforzheim.
Here they called on Henry Kienlin, whom they found a _Friend_ in
principle and practice, and who had given many proofs of his fidelity to
his principles by the persecution he had endured from his relations, and
the pecuniary loss he had suffered for refusing to comply with
ecclesiastical and military demands. He was a man of station and influence
in the town. He had not previously had personal acquaintance with any
members of the Society of Friends, but had read many of their writings. He
accompanied the travellers five miles out of the town to a little flock of
Separatists, who had not yet obtained religious liberty, and to whom it
was forbidden under a severe penalty to attend meetings held by strangers.
On the visiters entering the house of one of them, a number presently
collected; and as they stood together, a solemn feeling pervaded the
assembly, and John Yeardley was moved to address them in gospel testimony.
Henry Kienlin followed, explaining the principles of Friends clearly, and
giving them some suitable advice. They were laboring under the want of
discipline and organization, and of some one properly to represent their
case to the government. Some of them called the next day at Pforzheim, to
see the Friends again before they left.

The next place where they halted was Stuttgardt, to which city H. Kienlin
gave them his company. Here they visited Queen Catharine's Institution, a
school for the training of girls in reduced circumstances, as teachers,
&c., where 170 young persons were being educated. They were also
introduced to a number of pious individuals, and among them to Pastor
Hoffmann of Kornthal, whose excellent institution they were unable at this
time to visit. An appointment had been made for them to meet at Basle
Louis A. Majolier of Congenies, who was to serve as their guide and French
interpreter through Switzerland and France, and they felt obliged on being
informed of this appointment to pursue their journey more quickly than
they otherwise would have done.

Returning to Pforzheim, they stopped at Muehlhausen, where they called on
Mueller, minister of a congregation, consisting of 170 persons, who had
separated a few years before from the Catholics. This young man received
them with openness and affection, and before they parted, John Yeardley
had something to say to him under religious exercise, which he received in
the love in which it was spoken. From Pforzheim they went direct to Basle,
through Freiburg. On their arrival they were much disappointed to find
that Louis Majolier had waited for them many days, and hearing no tidings
of them, had returned to Geneva, supposing they had gone on to that city
by another route.

At Basle they were introduced to many pious persons, conspicuous among
whom was Blumhardt, inspector of the Mission-house, who behaved towards
them "as a loving and kind father in Christ." He encouraged them in their
concern to have a religious meeting with the students. The meeting took
place in the evening when the young men were collected for supper and
devotion; they received the word which was preached to them in gospel
love, and manifested towards our friends no small degree of tenderness and
affection. John Yeardley says:--


We had reason to believe there are among them many precious young men who
are preparing for usefulness. The grounds on which this place is conducted
are different from most of the kind. None are sent out but those who can
really say they feel it to be their religious duty to go to any certain
people or country. A sweet young man, who was extremely attentive to us,
Charles Haensel, is since gone to Sierra Leone to teach the poor negroes,
from a conviction of duty.


One day during their sojourn, C. Haensel took them to a meeting for
worship, held in the house of C. F. Spittler.


J.Y. says, we sat until they had performed part of their worship, and then
the leader signified to the company that a few Friends from England were
present, and told us that if we had anything to offer we had full liberty
to do so. Silence ensuing, dear M.S. found herself constrained to address
them in a way suited to the occasion; I was also enabled to express what
came before me. They afterwards expressed their thankfulness for the
opportunity.


From Basle William Seebohm returned to Pyrmont, and the English Friends,
hoping that they might meet Louis Majolier at Berne, went forward to that
city, but were again disappointed.

Although they were anxious to reach Geneva as quickly as possible, the
attraction of gospel love towards Zurich was so strong that they could not
continue their journey until they had visited that city. They arrived
there on the 2nd of the Twelfth Month. The state of their own feelings and
the refreshing Christian intercourse which awaited them are thus described
in the Diary:--


First-day, we sat down to hold our little meeting. It was to me a low
time, but I still thought the hand of divine help was near to comfort us,
and before the close dear M. S. was drawn into supplication in a way which
expressed the feelings of all our hearts. After this season of spiritual
refreshment, we called on Professor Gessner, who, with his wife and
family, was truly glad to see us. Being near dinner-time, we could not
stay long; but their daughter offered to accompany us to her aunt's this
afternoon, and accordingly came to our inn, and went with us to "Miss"
Lavater, who, with Gessner's wife, is a daughter of the pious author
Lavater. She received us with open arms, but spoke only German, or at
least but very little French, so that M. S. conversed with her in German.
She spoke of Stephen Grellet with much interest and affection: he lives in
the remembrance of all in this country who have seen and known him, as
well as William Allen. How pleasant it is to find that such devoted
instruments have left such a good savor behind them! Wherever we follow
dear Stephen, his presence has made a sufficient introduction to us; but I
regret exceedingly my own incapability of being sufficiently useful in
these precious opportunities which we meet with: but, as we often say in
our little company, This is like a voyage of discovery; and our humble
endeavors, however weak, may have a tendency to open the way for others
who may be made more extensively useful, should such ever be led to visit
the solitary parts where we have been.

We were invited to drink tea this afternoon by our friend Gessner, and on
a nearer acquaintance found this a precious family; his wife is a
sweet-spirited person, and their daughters pious young women. One of them,
in particular, I thought not only bore the mark of having been with her
Saviour, but a desire was also expressed in her countenance to abide with
him: may He who has visited her mind draw her more and more by the cords
of his love and preserve her from the evil which is in the world! When tea
was ended, we dropped into silence, and Pastor Gessner offered up a prayer
from the sincerity of his heart, and it was evidently attended by the
spirit of divine grace and life. Afterwards dear M.S. and I expressed what
was on our minds; I interpreted for her as well as I could, and I hope
they understood it. We were all much tendered in sympathy together, and I
think the visit to this family will not soon be forgotten: we took leave
of them in the most affectionate manner, they expressing sincere desires
for our preservation.


On their return to Berne they met with some pious ladies:


One of whom, says John Yeardley, spoke German with me, and entered pretty
suddenly on the subject of the bread and wine supper, or sacrament. She
seemed to have lost sight that there is a spiritual communion which the
soul can hold with its Saviour, and which needs not the help of outward
shadows; but it is remarkable when our reasons for the disuse of such
things are given in simplicity and love, how the feelings of others become
changed towards us; they then see we do not refuse the administration of
them out of obstinacy, but from a tender conscience.


On the 8th they drove to Lausanne, and the next day to Geneva. John
Yeardley has preserved, in his diary of this part of the journey, a little
anecdote of French character which naturally struck him the more forcibly
from his having hitherto been conversant only with the phlegmatic
temperament of the Germans. The coachman, it should be said, was of that
nation.


On the road between Nyon and Geneva a little incident occurred which
showed us the liveliness of the French temperament. A man got up behind
our carriage, and our coachman very naturally whipped him down. The man
followed us quietly for a while, but at length his wounded dignity
overcame his patience, and he came up to our coachman and began to speak
furiously on the impropriety of his having whipped him. Finding he could
make nothing of one who understood not what he said, he addressed himself
to our friend Martha Towell, and said he knew he had done wrong; but the
coachman should have told him to get down, which was customary in their
country, and not to have whipped him. M.T. was prepared to appease his
wrath by a mild reply, which eased the poor man very much; otherwise I
think we should have had more trouble with him; but he seemed to be
quieted, and said, Teach your coachman to say, in French, "descendez."


They reached Geneva just in time to prevent the departure of Louis
Majolier:


Who, says Martha Savory, was indeed rejoiced to see us after all his
anxiety. But, she continues, great as was our mutual satisfaction at
meeting, I am inclined to think it would have been better if this plan had
never been proposed, as it was a means of preventing some movements which
might have tended much to our relief; and his mind was in such an anxious
state about home that he could not give himself to anything that might
have opened at Geneva or Lausanne (to which I expected to return), but
begged us, very earnestly, to return with him to Congenies, as soon as
possible.--

(_Letter to E. Dudley_.)


They found the religious world at Geneva in a state of convulsion.


The secret poison of infidelity, says J.Y., has a good deal sapped the
principle of real religion; and the clergy of the Established Church have
preached a doctrine tending to Socinianism. A few young ministers have
boldly come forth and separated themselves, and are determined, in the
midst of persecution, to preach Christ and him crucified. Some of these
seem to have gone to the opposite extreme, for they hold too strongly the
principles of predestination. It is a remarkable time in this
neighborhood, as well as at Lausanne, where many are awakened to seek more
after the substance of religion.


At Geneva they formed a friendship with several persons, among whom were
Pastors Moulinier and L'Huillier, and Captain Owen, an Englishman. With
the last-named they were united in close bonds of religious affection;
they were enabled to administer to his spiritual wants, and he was forward
to render them assistance in every possible way.


The journey from Geneva to Nismes was tedious, occupying more than a week.


On approaching Nismes, John Yeardley says, the beautiful olives and
vineyards, together with the wild rocky aspect around, form a pleasing
sight; and to see them pruning, digging and dunging about the trees,
reminds one of the relations of Scripture history.


At Nismes they went to see the amphitheatre:--


From the top of which, says J.Y., we had a view of the city and the
surrounding neighborhood, which is indeed beautiful. The great number of
olives, vines, fig-trees, &c., excite a train of ideas pleasing and
indescribable.


In travelling through Switzerland John Yeardley had been often brought
into a low state of mind, and on approaching Congenies, the final object
of the journey, his heart was stirred to its depths. It is very
instructive to observe what were his feelings in reaching a place to which
his mind had been, so long directed.


The road, he says, was better, and the outward prospect a little
enlivening; but it is not easy to describe the feelings my mind was under
in approaching a place which has so long occupied my thoughtfulness to
visit. The prospect is discouraging, but I must be content and sink down
to the spring of life, which can alone make known the objects of duty and
qualify for their fulfilment. In the midst of all my spiritual poverty a
stream of gratitude flows in my heart to the Father of mercies, that he
has been pleased to preserve us in many dangers, and bring us safe to this
part of his heritage; and if it should be his will that I should have
nothing to do but to suffer for his name's sake, may he grant me patience
to bear it.


Martha Savory's feelings on the same occasion were also those of deep
gratitude for the preservation experienced during their journey, united,
she says, with an humbling sense of many omissions and great unworthiness,
yet of help having been mercifully administered in the time of
need.--(_Letter of 2 mo. 10, 1826_.)

Edward Brady was spending the winter at Congenies for the sake of his
health, and his society was a source of no little comfort to John
Yeardley; who, however, still, frequently labored under spiritual
depression.


Before dinner, he writes under date of the 23rd of the Twelfth Month, we
took a walk to M.S.'s windmill, from whence we had a fair view of
Congenies and the neighborhood, which is of a wild description. On
reflecting on the place and circumstances connected with it, my mind was
filled with various ideas, but none of them of an encouraging nature.


His discouragement was increased by ignorance of the language, and, with
his accustomed diligence, on the morrow after his arrival he commenced
learning French. On the recurrence of his birth-day, which was nearly
coincident with the beginning of the year, he says:--


I am once more entered on a new year of my life, I fear without the last
having been much improved; and to form resolutions of amendment in my own
strength can avail me nothing. May He who knows my infirmities assist me
to overcome them and to become more useful in his cause. My discouragement
still continues; I don't feel those refreshing seasons which I have often
experienced in times past; the pure life is often low in meeting, and I am
not so watchful and diligent to improve my time and talent as I ought to
be. I often feel as one already laid by useless, and the language of my
heart is, "O that I were as in days past!"


Soon after their arrival at Congenies, Martha Savory met with a serious
accident. Thinking a ride would be beneficial to her health, when the rest
of the party drove one afternoon to Sommieres, she accompanied them on
horseback. She had not a proper saddle, and her horse being eager to keep
up with the carriage set off downhill at so rapid a rate as to throw her
to the ground. The cap of one knee was displaced by the fall, and,
although she soon recovered so as to be able to walk, the limb continued
to be subject to weakness for some years.

As soon as M. S. was sufficiently recovered, she and her companions
visited the Friends at Congenies and the neighboring villages from house
to house, and also assembled on one occasion the heads of families, and on
another the young people of the Society. In reviewing a part of this
service John Yeardley says:--


3 _mo_. 6.--It has been a deeply exercising time, but has tended much
more to the relief of our minds, at least as regards myself, than I had
anticipated. From the discouraged state of mind I passed through for the
first few weeks at this place, I expected to leave it burdened and
distressed, but am thankful to acknowledge that holy help has been near to
afford relief to my poor tossed spirit, and I have cause to believe it is
in divine wisdom that I am here.


On the 13th of the Third Month they took leave of their friends at
Congenies to return to England, being accompanied by Edward Brady, and
during part of the journey by Louis Majolier. By the way they had some
religious intercourse with Protestant dissenters at a few places; but at
St. Etienne, where they had expected to remain a fortnight, they found the
door nearly closed to their entrance; a company of pious persons in this
town were at that time so nearly united with Friends as to bear their
name.


These, says John Yeardley, in a letter, are now reduced to about twenty in
number. They have suffered and still suffer much persecution from the
Roman Catholics. They are forbidden by heavy fines to meet together,
except in very small companies. We met them several times in their small
meetings to much comfort; there are a few among them who have stood firm
through the heat of trial, and these are precious individuals. The priests
are exceedingly jealous. On our arrival in the town we held our little
meeting with, these pious people on First-day morning; the priest came to
the house of the woman Friend where we had been to demand who we were and
where we lodged, and said it was we who had caused them to err, and he
would convince us in their presence that we were not only in error
ourselves, but had led them into error also. But we saw nothing of him,
and left the place in safety, which we considered a great favor; for such
has been their rage that they have dared to shoot at some missionaries who
have been in the neighborhood (_Letter to Thomas Yeardley, 4 mo.
19_.)


The rest of the journey through France was in general dreary, the external
accommodation being bad, and the consolation of spiritual intercourse very
scanty. At Arras, however, they were refreshed by the company of a
Protestant minister, a liberal and worthy man, who had "to stand alone in
a large district of weak-handed Protestants among strong-headed
Catholics."

Arriving at Calais, Martha Savory and Martha Towell, with Edward Brady,
crossed over to England, leaving John Yeardley to follow at a later
period. On the 14th of the Fourth Month he writes:--


My dear companions left for England. I watched them from the pier until I
could bear to stay no longer, and then returned sorrowfully to my
quarters, and soon repaired to the little retired lodging we had engaged
for me in the country, where I spent a few days in learning French, &c. In
taking a retrospect of our long journey I feel a large degree of peaceful
satisfaction in having been desirous to fulfil (though very imperfectly) a
religious duty; and these feelings of gratitude excited a wish that the
remainder of my few days might be more faithfully devoted to the service
of my great Lord and Master.


The little lodging of which he speaks was "a retired chamber on the
garden-wall;" and having left it for a few days to go to Antwerp with the
carriage and horses which they had used on the journey, on his return it
had already acquired, in his view, something of the character of home.


The beautiful green branches, says he, modestly looking in at the window,
give me a silent welcome; and the little birds chirruping in the garden,
which is my drawing-room and study. I cannot but acknowledge how grateful
I feel in being permitted to rest in so quiet a retreat, shut up from many
of those anxious cares which have perplexed the former part of my
life.--(_Diary, 4 mo. 27_.)


The last few words of this memorandum may seem at first sight to refer to
his temporary seclusion from the world in his little hermitage at Calais;
but there is little doubt that they have a wider significance, and contain
also an allusion to his anticipated union with Martha Savory. The prospect
of this union seems to have sprung up during the journey, and to have
become matured before they separated at Calais; and the effect of it was,
amongst other things, to set him free from the necessity of pursuing
business any longer as a means of livelihood, and to ensure to him a
provision sufficient for his moderate wants.

On the 12th of the Fifth Month, John Yeardley left Calais for London. At
the inn in Calais, a little incident occurred, the relation of which may
be useful to others.


A serious Frenchman, who was going on board the same packet, was struck
with my not paying for the music after dinner, and was much inclined to
know my reason, believing my refusal was from a religious motive. At a
suitable opportunity he asked me, and confessed he had felt a scruple of
the same kind, and regretted he had not been faithful. This slight
incident was the means of making me acquainted with an honest and
religious man, as I afterwards found him to be.

How important it is to be faithful in very little things, not knowing what
effect they may have on others!




CHAPTER VII.


HIS MARRIAGE WITH MARTHA SAVORY.

1826-27.

During his stay in London, John Yeardley attended the Yearly Meeting, and
the Annual Meetings of the School, Anti-slavery, and other Societies, with
which he was much gratified. Soon after the termination of the Yearly
Meeting, he went into Yorkshire to see his mother.


6 _mo._ 13.--I left London in the mail for Sheffield, and on the 14th
slept at my dear brother Thomas's at Ecclesfield, who took me on the 15th,
to Barnsley. I was truly thankful to be favored to see my precious mother
once more. On the 19th, I attended the Monthly Meeting at Highflatts. It
is not easy to describe the various thoughts which rushed into my mind on
seeing so many Friends whom I had known and loved in former days. The
meeting was a much-favored time, although we felt the want of some of the
fathers and mothers who are removed.


In the next entry there is an allusion to the disastrous commercial panic
by which this year was distinguished.


7 _mo._ 24.--Have been very low and deserted in mind for a long time
past. It is a time for the trial of my patience, and yet I have many
favors for which I ought to be truly thankful. It is a precious privilege
to be relieved from the commercial difficulties which at present abound in
the trading world. May it be my lot ever to keep so, if consistent with
the divine will.

8 _mo._ 21.--Monthly Meeting at Wooldale. The meeting was exceedingly
crowded with strangers; there was not room in the house to hold all who
came. I had been very low all the morning, and to see such a number of
people at the meeting sunk me low indeed. I was enabled to turn inward to
Him from whom help alone comes; and blessed be his holy Name, he did not
forsake me in the needful time, but was pleased once more to give strength
and utterance to communicate what came before me. My certificates from
Germany and Congenies were read and accepted, and many Friends expressed
much unity and sympathy with me on my return to them, which was a comfort
and strength to me.


On the 1st of the Ninth Month, he again went to London. During his stay in
the city, he took the opportunity of visiting the Industrial Schools at
Lindfield, founded by William Allen; a kind of institution which always
engaged his warmest sympathy and approbation.

With the new turn which was given to the course of his life by his
betrothal to Martha Savory, it is not surprising that he should have
considered his residence abroad to be brought, in the order of Divine
Providence, to a natural termination, and that he now turned his attention
to taking up his abode again in his native land. In selecting a place of
residence, he seems to have had no hesitation in making choice of the
neighborhood of Barnsley; the spot, as the reader may remember, which
seemed to him, when he was obliged to remove to Bentham, as that which had
the first claim upon his gospel services. The state of his mind, whilst
preparing his intended residence at Burton, the same village where he used
to attend meeting in his early days, may be seen by the following
memorandum:--


9 _mo_. 26. _At York_.--It was a large Quarterly Meeting. Living
ministry flowed freely, and I thought even poor me was a little refreshed:
but I have been for a long time in a deplorable state, in a spiritual
sense.

Since the Quarterly Meeting, my time and thoughts have been much occupied
in fitting up our intended residence at the cottage at Burton; and I may
truly say, I have been cumbered about "many things," which, I think, has
kept my mind in a poor, barren state. O the many weeks that I have had to
sit with my mouth in the dust to bemoan my own inward misery! My conflict
of mind has been increased by the trying state of my precious mother's
health. My attendance on her in this poorly state, and at this season of
the year, when I lost my poor dearest Bessie, reminded me strongly of my
dear departed lamb.


Before his marriage with Martha Savory was accomplished, he was called
upon to attend the deathbed of his mother, and to follow the remains of
his father to the grave.


11 _mo_. 16.--On the 3rd I left the cottage, and took my luggage to
go from Barnsley by the coach to London. Stepped down to take leave of my
dear mother, but found her so weak that I could not at all think of
leaving her; and was indeed glad that I did not go, for the dear creature
continued to grow weaker and weaker till a quarter past three o'clock on
Seventh-day morning, 4th of Eleventh Month, when she peacefully breathed
her last. She was fully sensible to the close, and also fully sensible
that her end was near.

Her precious remains were interred at Burton on the 7th, after a meeting
appointed for the occasion at Barnsley. In her room, before we left
Redbrook [where she had resided], I was enabled to petition the throne of
mercy for a little help and strength through the remainder of the solemn
scene, which, I think, was in a remarkable manner granted. After having
paid the last tribute of affection and duty to our endeared parent,
fourteen of our dear friends and relations dined with me at the cottage.
It is remarkable that the opening of our residence should be in this awful
manner; but we were much comforted in feeling in the midst of all our
sorrow, the greatest degree of peace and quietude on the solemn occasion.

On Fourth-day, being the day after we had taken leave of our precious
mother's remains, I went with my brother and sister to see our poor dear
father, who had been ill in bed about two weeks. We arrived about seven
o'clock; but, to our great surprise, about an hour before we reached the
place, our beloved father had fallen asleep, never to wake more in this
world. This was indeed awful, but the Judge of the earth must do right. We
attended the interment on First-day, the 12th. The meeting-house at
Woodhouse was pretty full, and a good and tendering meeting it was. It
felt hard work to labor among a number of worldly-minded people; but I
have learned to consider it one of the greatest of privileges to be
appointed to service, even though attended with suffering. Since this time
my poor mind has felt more tender and more susceptible of good. O that it
may continue, and that I may remain humble and watchful for the time to
come, and live prepared for that awful change which I. know not how soon
may be sent to my dwelling!--(11 _mo_. 16.)


On the 18th he pursued his journey to London, and on the 21st, at
Gracechurch-street Monthly Meeting, he presented his intention of marriage
with Martha Savory. "In a private interview at Elizabeth Dudley's," he
writes, "Richard Barrett and E. Dudley expressed their full unity with our
intended union, in terms of much interest and encouragement." On the 13th
of the Twelfth Month the marriage took place at Gracechurch-street
Meeting-house.


The time in silence, says the Diary, was very solemn, and acceptable
testimonies were borne by William Allen and Elisabeth Dudley. After
meeting we adjourned to the Library to take leave, where a stream of
encouragement flowed to us from several of our dear friends, which felt
truly strengthening. About twenty of our friends and relations dined at
A.B. Savory's at Stoke Newington. The day was spent, I trust, profitably,
and on parting, about seven o'clock, we had a comfortable time, and
something was expressed by my M. and self, and dear W. Allen. After taking
a very affectionate leave, we posted on to Barnet. My brother Thomas and
J.A. Wilson took us up the next morning; and we four came down in the
coach to Sheffield, and [the nest day] to Ecclesfield to dinner, and
arrived at our humble cottage the 15th of the Twelfth Month, I trust with
thankful hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *


It is appropriate to give in this place some account of Martha Savory's
character and Christian experience. That our notice is brief and
incomplete, is owing to the loss of most of her own memoranda, and of the
letters she addressed to those with whom she was on intimate terms. She
possessed, it will be seen, an intellectual character and disposition, as
well as an experience, very different from those of her husband. It does
not follow, however, that this dissimilarity was a hindrance to their
joint service in the gospel, any more than to their social harmony and
love. It may be, on the contrary, that Martha Savory's quickness of
understanding and of feeling, the readiness with which she apprehended the
sentiments and condition of others, her conversancy with the allurements
of city life, and the perils of unbelief from which she had been rescued,
fitted her in a peculiar degree to be her husband's helper in the
ministry, especially in their travels on the Continent.

She was born in London in 1781, and was the daughter of Joseph and Anna
Savory. To an active and vigorous understanding she united a strength of
will which would brook little control, together with much energy and
fearlessness; and the propensity to follow the vain inclinations of the
unregenerate heart displayed itself in an indulgence in much that was
inimical to the restraints of Christian principle. Her disposition was
generous; all her emotions were ardent, and were seldom subjected to the
discipline of a corrected judgment. There were, however, various
occasions, even in her very early years, when, through the visitations of
heavenly love, her mind was forcibly aroused to a conviction of the need
of redeeming grace. She was particularly impressed by the preaching and
influence of William Savery, whose home in London was at her father's
house. In some memoranda of this period, she remarks, "Frequently in the
meetings appointed by him, I was greatly wrought upon by his living
ministry;" and notwithstanding that she subsequently wandered far from the
way of peace, there is good ground to believe that the remembrance of
those truths which had penetrated her heart through the instrumentality of
this gospel messenger, was never altogether effaced.

Being naturally endowed with a lively imagination and a taste for
literature, she sought to suppress the upbraidings of conscience in
intellectual pursuits, and employed much time in the composition of verses
that were merely a transcript of visionary and romantic ideas, afterwards
published under the title of "Poetical Tales." This volume obtained but a
limited circulation; for, soon after it had issued from the press, the
conviction that it had been an unhallowed and unprofitable exercise of her
understanding was so impressed upon her spirit, that, although the
sacrifice was considerable, she caused all the unsold copies to be
destroyed. It is interesting to observe how, in later years, this talent
for metrical rhythm, which had been so misapplied, became consecrated, as
were all her faculties, to the promotion of piety and virtue.

During the long period in which her mental energies were thus misdirected,
a cloud of darkness enveloped her spirit. She had, when about nineteen
years of age, imbibed sceptical views in reference to the truths of
revealed religion; and as she seldom read the Holy Scriptures, and was
almost a stranger to their sacred contents, her imagination pictured an
easier way to escape from the power and the consequences of sin than in
that self-renunciation which the Gospel enjoins. In some memoranda of her
experience, she says, in reference to the snares by which her mind was
entangled:--"I was led to a love of metaphysical studies, and fancied I
discovered, with clearness, that human vice, and consequently human
misery, sprang from ignorance of the nature of virtue, and that if mankind
would become instructed they would become good; and that it was only
necessary to behold virtue in its native beauty, to love it and to
practise it. O how fallacious was this reasoning! 'The world by wisdom
knows not God; the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.'"

At length, however, when, in 1811, Martha Savory had completed the
thirtieth year of her life, she became deeply impressed by the conviction
that she was wandering on the barren mountains of doubt and error; and
through the renewed visitation of divine love, the light of the Sun of
righteousness again shined into her heart, and its humbling influence
brake the rock in pieces. Some circumstances occurred that were
instrumental in promoting this great change. She was introduced into
frequent communication with some honored servants of the Lord,
particularly with the late Mary Dudley, and her daughter Elizabeth. An
attack of indisposition prostrated her bodily strength, and afforded
opportunity for serious reflection. Whilst from this cause confined to her
chamber, a young person (Susanna Corder), with whom she was only very
slightly acquainted, but to whom she was ever afterwards united in an
intimate and confidential friendship, was attracted to visit her. The
interview was a memorable one; the overshadowing wing of goodness and
mercy being permitted to gather their spirits under its blessed influence.
On her recovery from this illness, Martha Savory paid a short visit to her
new friend, which afforded an opportunity for the manifestation of
continued deep Christian interest; and, on her quitting the house, Susanna
Corder put into her hand a copy of the "Olney Hymns." When she had
proceeded a few steps towards home, she opened the book, and without
noticing even the title, instantly cast her eyes on the lines, "The
rebel's surrender to grace," commencing--


    "Lord, Thou hast won; at length I yield;
    My heart, by mighty grace compelled,
        Surrenders all to Thee;
    Against thy terrors long I strove,
    But who can stand against thy love?
       Love conquers even me."


She was deeply affected by the remarkable application of the whole of the
hymn to the experience which she was then passing through; she could not
refrain from weeping, and to avoid the observation of passersby, she
walked through secluded streets, giving vent to her emotion; and she
afterwards repeatedly expressed her belief that there was, in this
apparently casual incident, a divine interposition and guidance; "for,"
said she, "_every word_ of that hymn appeared as if purposely written
to describe _my_ case, so that I could scarcely read it from the many
tears I shed over it. It is no exaggerated picture."

She now spent much time alone, almost constantly reading the Bible; and so
precious was the influence that operated on her spirit, whilst thus
employed, and so wonderfully were the blessed truths of the gospel
unfolded to her understanding, that, as she expressed it, "every page of
it seemed, as it were, illuminated." Sustained by the joy and peace of
believing, she was enabled to follow in faith the leadings of the Holy
Spirit, and, through divine strength, to become as a whole burnt sacrifice
on the altar of that gracious Redeemer, who had, in his rich mercy,
plucked her from the pit of destruction. Having had much forgiven, she
loved much, and shrunk not from the many and deep humiliations which were
involved in such a course of dedication to her Lord. Even her external
appearance strikingly bespoke her altered character. There had always been
in her countenance an expression of benevolence, but it had not indicated
a gentle or diffident mind. In her demeanor and personal attire, she had
conspicuously followed the vain fashions of the times; but now, humility,
with a modest and retiring manner, marked her conduct; everything merely
ornamental was discarded, and the softening, effect of a sanctifying
principle imparted to the features of her face a sweetness which,
impressing the beholder with a consciousness of the regenerating power
that wrought within, was, to more than a few of her acquaintance, both
arousing and instructive. She changed her residence from Finsbury to the
borough of Southwark, and settled near her friend Susanna Corder, with
whom she united in the formation of a philanthropic association,
"The Southwark Female Society for the relief of sickness and extreme
want." The late Mary Sterry, and several other estimable members of
Southwark meeting, together with benevolent individuals among the
different religious denominations of the district, soon joined them, and
the society became a highly influential channel through which assistance
has been variously rendered to many thousands of the indigent poor; and it
still continues, though with a reduced scale of operations, to be an
important source of help to the sick and destitute.

Martha Savory devoted to this work of mercy much time and personal
exertion; but a more important service was also designed for her. She felt
constrained to give evidence of her love to Christ by a public testimony
to the grace which had been vouchsafed to her through Him who is "the way,
the truth, and the life." Deep were the conflicts of spirit which she
endured ere she could yield to this solemn requirement, but "sweet peace"
was, she says, as she records the sacrifice, the result of thus
acknowledging her gracious Lord. "This step," she continues, "appears to
me to involve the greatest of all possible mental reduction, but I
reverently believe it was necessary for me, and mote, perhaps on my own
account than on account of others; for, without this bond, and the
necessary baptisms attending this vocation, I should have been in danger
of turning back, and perhaps altogether losing the little spiritual life
which has been mercifully raised." She adds a fervent petition for
preservation and guidance, and that, by whatever means, however suffering
to nature, the vessel might be purified, and fitted for the Master's use.
She first spoke as a minister in the year 1814. The humiliation and
brokenness of spirit which marked these weighty engagements, were felt by
many, especially among her youthful friends, to be peculiarly impressive,
as tokens of the soul-cleansing operations of omnipotent love, and as an
awakening call to yield to the same regenerating influence.

She was acknowledged as a minister by Southwark Monthly Meeting, in the
year 1818, when she had reached the age of 36; and in 1821, with the
cordial approval of the meetings of which she was a member, she commenced
that course of missionary labor in the gospel, to which she was
subsequently so much devoted. Her mission, on this occasion, was to
Congenics, where, and in the surrounding villages, she remained twelve
months.

A letter to one of her sisters, written a few years after her marriage, so
fully represents her religious sentiments, and the doctrine she was
concerned to preach and maintain, that it may not improperly conclude this
outline of her mental and religious character.


Burton, 13th of Twelfth Month, 1830.

I read thy remarks, my endeared sister, on the present state of things
amongst us, with much interest, from having had corresponding feelings
frequently raised in my own mind in this day of general excitement on
religious subjects.

It remains to be a solemn truth that nothing can draw to God but what
proceeds from him; and whatever may be the eloquence or oratory of man, if
it be not the gift of God, and under his holy anointing, which always has
a tendency to humble the creature and exalt the Creator, it will in the
end only scatter and deceive. It has long appeared to me that true vital
religion is a very simple thing, although from our fallen state, requiring
continual warfare with evil to keep it alive. It surely consists in
communion, and at times a degree of union, with our Omnipotent Creator,
through the mediation of our Holy Redeemer. And seeing these feelings
cannot be produced by eloquent discourses or beautiful illustrations of
Scripture, but by deep humiliation and frequent baptisms of spirit,
whereby the heart is purified and fitted to receive a greater degree of
divine influence; seeing it is produced by daily prayer, by giving up our
own will, and seeking above all things to do the will of our Heavenly
Father, surely there is cause to hope that those who are convinced of
this, and who have tasted of spiritual communion through this appointed
means, will never be satisfied with anything however enticing which, if
not under the influence of the Holy Spirit, may well be compared to
"sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal."

I am far from confining this influence to the ministers of our little
Society, but assuredly believe that those who are brought under the
immediate teachings of the Spirit, under every profession, will be more
and more convinced that they cannot preach to profit the people, in their
own will and at their own command; and that as true and spiritual religion
prevails they must in this respect come to us, and not we go to them. Yet
still it is certainly a day of much excitement, and of danger especially
to the young and unawakened, and there never was a time when the members
of our Society were more loudly called upon to watch unto prayer both on
their own account and on account of others, humbly to implore, not only
that the Holy Spirit may not be taken from us, but that a greater
effusion of it may be poured upon us as a body, that so we may all be made
and kept alive in Him in whom is life, and the life is the light of men. I
believe this would be much more our experience, if the things of this
world were kept in subjection by fervent daily prayer and the obedience of
faith, which remain to be the means pointed out by our gracious Redeemer,
of communion with the Father through Him. What can be more pure than the
profession we make to be guided by the Holy Spirit? and if we really are
so, we shall be concerned to maintain this daily exercise of heart before
the Lord, and yet become what I reverently believe is his gracious will
respecting us, and _all_ under every name who are thus guided and
have become living members of the Church of Christ, even that we should be
as lights in the world, or a city set upon a hill which cannot be hid.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dwelling which John and Martha Yeardley occupied was on the highest
ground in the village, commanding a wide and cheerful prospect, and
overlooking, on the western side, the valley of the Dearn and the
conspicuous town of Barnsley, which, notwithstanding the smoke that
envelopes it, stands out in fine relief on the opposite hill. Their
cottage adjoined the Friends' burial-ground; and just on the other side of
the wall reposed the remains of Frances Yeardley, on the site formerly
occupied by the meeting-house.[5]

The house, says Martha Yeardley in a letter to her sister R. S., is warm
and comfortable, though at best what Londoners would esteem a poor place.
We feel quite satisfied with it; and when we get our garden in order, and
a cow and a few chickens, it will be equal to anything that I desire in
this world. To-day the snow has disappeared, and John is very busy with
his garden.--(1 _mo_. I, 1827.)


John and Martha Yeardley did not remain long idle in their new position.
In the First Month, 1827, they received a "minute" for visiting the
meetings in their Monthly Meeting; and in the Second Month they commenced
a tour amongst the meetings in some other parts of Yorkshire. These duties
occupied them until the 19th of the Fourth Month. We may extract from the
Diary recording the former of these engagements, a brief note of their
visit to Ackworth School.


1 _mo_. 20.--Lodged at J. Harrison's. On First and Second-day
evenings had some time of religious service with the young people at the
school, and felt much united in spirit to this interesting family. On
Fourth-day, Robert Whitaker accompanied us to Pontefract, and we were
comforted in his company, for we felt poor and weak--much like children
needing fatherly care.

Among John Yeardley's notes made during the more general visit, we meet
with a memorandum which may be taken to mark a stage or era in his
Christian experience. The daily record of religious exercise and feeling
which is so useful to many in the hidden season of tender growth and
preparation for future service, is less likely to be maintained--and, it
may be, less necessary--in the meridian of life, when the time and
strength are taken up with active labor.


3 _mo_.--I could write much as to the state of my mind, but have of
late thought it safer not to record all the inward dispensations which I
have to pass through. I feel strong desires to be wholly given up to serve
my great Lord and Master, and that I may above all things become qualified
for his service; but the baptisms through which I have to pass are many,
and exceedingly trying to the natural part. Nothing will do but to rely
wholly on the Divine Arm of Power for support in pure naked faith.




CHAPTER VIII.


THE SECOND CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1827-28.

PART I.--GERMANY.

After John and Martha Yeardley had visited their friends at home, their
minds were directed to the work which they had left uncompleted on the
continent of Europe; and, on their return from the Yearly Meeting, they
opened this prospect of service before the assembled church to which they
belonged.


(_Diary_) 6 _mo_. 18.--Were at the Monthly Meeting at
Highflatts, where we laid our concern before our friends to revisit some
parts of Germany and Switzerland, and to visit some of the descendants of
the Waldenses in the Protestant valleys of Piedmont; and, on our way home,
our friends and some other serious persons in the Islands of Guernsey and
Jersey. Our dear friends were favored to enter most fully and feelingly
into our views, and under a precious solemnity, a general sentiment of
unity and concurrence spread through the meeting, which constrained them,
(as the certificate expresses it) to leave us at liberty, accompanied with
warm desires for our preservation. Hearing the certificate read brought
the concern, if possible, more weightily than ever upon me, and a secret
prayer was raised in my heart that we might be enabled to go through the
prospect before us to the honor of Him who has called us into his work.


They attended the Quarterly Meeting in the latter part of this month, and
returned by way of Ackworth, where, says John Yeardley,


We had a comfortable parting with dear Robert and Hannah Whitaker, in
their own room. E.W. has passed with us through the deeps, and has indeed
been a true spiritual helper to us under our weighty exercises of mind.


On the 8th of the Seventh Month they set out, and on the 17th attended the
Meeting of Ministers and Elders in London.


The Morning Meeting was a precious and refreshing time to our poor tried
minds. There was a very full expression of near sympathy and entire unity
with us in our intended religious service. It is a strength and
encouragement not only to have the concurrence of our friends, but also to
know that we have a place in their prayers for our preservation and
support in every trying dispensation.


On the eve of their departure from London, a circumstance occurred of a
very disagreeable character. The shop of their brother, A.B. Savory, in
Cornhill, was broken open; many valuable articles were taken, and their
travelling trunks, which had been left there, were ransacked. Although
their loss was trifling, the annoyance of such a contretemps may easily
be conceived. J.Y. says:--


It is far from pleasant thus to be plundered of any part of our property;
but I consider it as much the duty of a Christian to bear with becoming
fortitude the cross-occurrences of common life as to be exercised in
religious service.


They left London on the 22nd, for Rotterdam. On their arrival, a
disastrous occurrence happened which gave a shock to their feelings. The
manner in which J.Y. mentions the event evinces his tenderness of mind in
commencing a long journey, in which his vocation was to be to sympathise
with the poor and afflicted.


Since we landed safely on shore a circumstance has occurred which has
brought a gloom over us. One of our shipmen being busy about the sails,
part of a beam fell from the top-mast and struck him on the head. He never
spoke more, but died instantly. He has left a widow and two children, not
only to weep for him, but also to feel bitterly his loss in a pecuniary
way. We intend to recommend their situation to some of our benevolent
friends in London. My heart is much affected in having to commence my
journal on a foreign shore by recording such an afflicting event. And, as
it regards ourselves, how much we have which calls for thankfulness that
we have so mercifully escaped.


From Rotterdam they directed their course to Pyrmont, passing through
Gouda, Utrecht, Arnheim, and Muenster; at the last place they were laid by
from the heat and weariness. They reached Friedenthal on the 4th of the
Eighth Month, and John Yeardley makes the following reflections on
re-entering his German home:--


As I find myself again in this country, many thoughts of former days
spring up in my mind. Since I was last here I have passed through much;
nevertheless the Lord has guided my steps, and I have cause to give Him
thanks.


They visited Minden and the little meetings around, bestowing much labor
on them; but at Pyrmont, to suffer, rather than to do, was their allotted
portion.


It sometimes seems to me, writes J.Y., that we have in this place little
to do and much to suffer. I am often cast down, and have to sit in silence
and darkness. This state of mind is an exercise of faith and patience,
through which much may be gained if it is turned to right account.

Of the Two Months' Meeting, he says:


On the whole a favorable time. But I am not without my fears that the
little Society in this place will lose ground, in a religious sense, if
more faithfulness is not manifested in little things.


Soon after their arrival in Germany they turned their steps towards the
north-west corner of that country, and the borders of Holland. The object
of this journey was to visit some places on the shores of the North Sea,
near Friesland, where the inundations of 1825 had caused great desolation,
and where a new colony had been formed by the government from among the
ruined families. This little journey was so emphatically, an act of faith,
and the course of it lay so much through a part of Europe seldom visited
by travellers, that we shall transcribe the diary of it without much
curtailment.


9 _mo_. 4.--Having for sometime felt an impression to visit
Friedrichgroden and other places on the store of the North Sea, near the
confines of East Friesland, we set out from Pyrmout in company with our
dear friend Louis Seebohm, travelling with extra-post in our own carriage.
We found this a pretty expeditions way of travelling for this country,
being able to make about fifty-five English miles a day. Between Oldendorf
and Bueckeburg, we experienced a remarkable preservation from danger. Our
postillion being a little sleepy, had not sufficient care of the reins,
and the horses suddenly turned off towards an inn, but missing the turn,
instantly fell into a deep ditch, one horse quite down, and the other
nearly so; the carriage wanted only a few inches further to go, and then
it would have come upon the horses, so that a few plunges must have upset
the whole concern. We sprang instantly out, and set the quiet animals
free. The man was so frightened he could scarcely step from, the box. The
whole affair did not last more than a few minutes, when we were on our way
again, with great cause for thankfulness to the Preserver of our lives.
The driver was so honest in acknowledging his fault, that I gave him his
_trinkgeld_, and our friend L. S. gave him some advice. We got well
on through Minden to Diepnau and lodged there.

Next morning set out about seven o'clock, and that day travelled late to
reach Oldenburg, which we accomplished at about one in the morning. Next
morning we were in a dilemma which way to take to find our place of
destination. The landlord was kind in sending out several times to gain
information, but in vain: at length there came into the room a deaf and
dumb man who frequented the house, and who, when he knew our inquiry,
immediately wrote down the particulars of the place, and explained it by
signs on the table. We left two books for this intelligent man for his
kindness, and set forward. Dined at Varel, and had two poor tired horses
and an awkward driver to Jever. We gave him several severe lectures
without much effect; at length we came to a small inn on the road, where
he made a stand, and said he could go no further without two more horses,
which we really believed was true, for if he had not got them we must have
stuck in the sand. The horses being procured we got to Jever about eleven
o'clock.

Here was a good inn, and we rested pretty well; but in the morning
discouragement took hold of my spirits in a way that I have seldom
experienced. I was ready to conclude we were altogether wrong and out of
the way of our duty; but forward we must now go to see the end of this
exercising journey. The country about Varel and Jever is remarkably
fertile in pasture. The cows handsome, rolling in abundance of grass, and
pretty much the whole country had the appearance of ease and plenty; in
Varel we saw the poor-house, a building capable of containing 400 persons,
and only four individuals were there. The inhabitants live in simplicity,
but also in the general ignorance and indifference as to religion. I was
exceedingly low in mind on the way, but felt once more that we were in our
right place, and my precious M. Y. encouraged me by saying we should not
go there in vain. On opening the Bible, I was comforted in turning to
Psalm lxxviii. 12-14.

After having thus travelled some days, as it were in the dark, we arrived
at Friedrichen Siel, near Carolinen Siel, in which neighborhood, on the
border of the North Sea, lie Friedrichgroden, New Augustengroden, and New
Friedrichgroden. It is a tract of land gained from the sea of about ten or
twelve hundred acres, banked round in three divisions, and made arable, on
which are built about twenty farmhouses, which form almost a new world.
This land is the property of the government; a small sum is paid on
entering, and a yearly ground-rent, and then it is the property of the
purchaser for ever.

As soon as we stepped on the banks of one of these _grodens_, and I
set my eye on one of these retired abodes, I felt no longer at a loss
where we should go or what we should do. It opened suddenly on my mind as
clear as the sun at noon-day, that we must remain here a day or two and
visit these new settlers in their dwellings. Accordingly we drove to the
inn at Carolinen Siel. On asking for a map of the surrounding country, one
was put into oar hands containing a plan of the places which had suffered
so severely by the floods in the spring of 1825; which rendered those
people much more interesting to us.

After dinner we commenced our visit, and called on a young man and his
sister who live on one of the farms, and have about seventy acres of land.
They received us with a hearty welcome, and entered into friendly
conversation. The house was one of the first on New Augustengroden, built
in 1816, [swept] down by the water in 1825, and rebuilt the same year. He
was an intelligent young man, and answered many inquiries which we made.

Finding the distance might be too great to walk, next morning we procured
horses, and started about seven o'clock, taking from our small stock of
books one for each family. We commenced intercourse with them by first
interesting ourselves about their families and domestic concerns, not
unmindful of every suitable opportunity to turn the conversation on the
subject of religion, which is too much neglected by most of them. They are
of the Lutheran profession; but the church being at some distance, they do
not regularly attend. Most of them have as many as six children, and some
eight, with fine countenances. We felt deeply interested, particularly for
the mothers, some of whom are tender-spirited, amiable women, and wept
much in the opportunities we had with them. Their late afflictions have
made on some a deep impression, and it was a time when, I trust, such a
visit might be of advantage. In the floods, several had their houses swept
away; and one lost thirty-six head of cattle, and had to drag his children
out of the water naked, and take refuge on the tops of the houses. But the
most touching case was that of a man who lost his wife and five children,
his father, mother, and servants. They were sent away in a waggon, as a
means of escape; but the waggon was swept away by the torrent, and all
perished. The husband, who was left alone in the house, got to land on
some boards, part of the wreck of the house, and expected to find his
family safe; what must have been his feelings when he found they had all
perished in the deep! We felt truly prepared to sympathise with them, and
think they were sensible of our visit being in the sincere love of the
Gospel. Their kindness towards us exceeded description. In going from
house to house, one of them seeing us in the field, and not knowing our
errand, thought we had missed our way, and came running almost out of
breath to set us in the road. When he found that our visit was intended
to him, he seemed overjoyed, and conducted us to his home and his
interesting wife. His name is Friedrich Fockensllammen. He soon showed us
all that was in his house and barns; and I may say he was equally ready to
tell us all that was in his heart. We could not get away without taking
coffee with them.

Having felt much towards seeing them together, the way seemed open to
propose to this man to have a meeting. He readily undertook to consult
with a few others; and he came to our inn next morning with another, when
he said, the good work must have a small beginning, and although he
himself was quite willing, the others did not see the necessity of it, or
were too cautious. This person told us that, with respect to temporals,
they could never have got forward again in the way they had done, had it
not been for the kind and effectual assistance received from England.
After an interesting conversation with these two, we parted in much
affection. My M.Y. drew up a short epistle, which was signed by us all,
and forwarded to them: this was an entire relief to our minds.

Understanding the fair was to commence on First-day morning, we found it
necessary on Seventh-day evening to seek fresh quarters. The First-day is
worse kept in the territories belonging to Hanover than in any part of the
Continent that I have seen, and the greatest religious ignorance prevails
there. The cause may rest with the Government in giving too much power to
the Church: the ecclesiastics are fond of keeping in their own hands all
things relating to religion, and will not suffer the light to shine that
the people may see for themselves. The Edict of Stade has lately been
renewed, prohibiting religious meetings; no unauthorised persons (as they
call it), are permitted to preach or hold meetings, on pain of
imprisonment; all foreign missionaries to be immediately sent beyond the
boundaries. The settlement we were visiting was partly in Hanover, and
partly in Oldenburg.


Besides these colonies on the reclaimed strand of the ocean, John Yeardley
had another object in undertaking this journey, which was to inspect the
Industrial Colony at Fredericks-Oort, in the province of Drenthe, in
Holland. Towards this place the party now directed their way.


Between Wittmund and Aurich (continues J.Y.) is a moor called Plagenburg,
about six English miles square, on which are some of the poorest mud-huts
I ever saw. People who intend to settle here from any part receive a grant
of land for ten years free, and afterwards pay a yearly ground-rent of
about five shillings an acre. The idle and burdensome poor are also sent
here; and by this means the whole neighborhood is relieved from
poor-rates, except for the support of a few individuals who spin, &c., in
the poor-house. We were informed that near Norden there is a colony for
thieves and gipsies, who are sent to this place and compelled to build
themselves huts and cultivate the land. They are strictly watched by the
police, and severely punished when they attempt to go away without leave.

We had a long and tedious ride, through deep sand, to Leer. On our arrival
we made inquiry about Fredericks-Oort, but could obtain no intelligence,
nor could we find it on the maps which we borrowed for examination. This
was very discouraging; for I had hoped, if it was right for us to go, we
should find some one to give us certain directions to it. I slept but
little, and next morning set again to work, and found there was a Jew in
the town who travelled much in Holland. I desired he might be sent for; he
came, and immediately gave us directions where to find the places we
wanted.

I ought not to omit remarking the comfortable feeling that I was favored
with, riding from Wittmund to Aurich [on the way to Leer]. In reflecting
in stillness where we had been and what we had done, I felt not only peace
and inward satisfaction, but thankfulness filled my heart that we had been
thus far enabled to do what we believed to be in the way of our duty. This
Scripture language passed through my mind: "Blessed are ye that sow beside
all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass." (Isa.
xxxii. 20.)

11_th_.--Left Leer about eleven o'clock in the morning, and expected
to arrive at Assen at eleven or twelve at night, but to our great
disappointment we travelled the night through, and only reached Assen at
seven next morning. At Wehndam on our way we rested the horses. Our friend
L.S. went for an hour to bed, and my M.Y. and self sat in the carriage and
would have slept, but there came so many admirers of our vehicle that we
could not sleep for their almost continual remarks about its elegance,
convenience, &c.

This part of Holland is fruitful; the houses are clean and neat; and the
dress of the women very singular. Their caps have a plate of silver or
gold on each side almost like a helmet, and sometimes very costly. At the
inn at Nieuweschans [on the borders of Germany and Holland], the cook had
one of these golden helmets which had cost about 150 florins.

In these flat countries they have no spring water; the land lies so much
below the sea that all is impregnated with salt. Rain water is used for
drinking, and the method of preserving it is in a deep reservoir lined
with boards and puddled with clay. I was surprised to find it kept good so
long: it is seldom known to go bad. One of the farmers on the Grodens drew
water out of his well and handed me a glass to drink; it had a yellowish
tinge, but except this I never saw clearer and have seldom tasted
pleasanter spring water, and the beat tea I ever drank was made from rain
water so preserved. One thing which contributes to its quality is the
great surface of tile which it has to run down, and which tends to filter
it.

The mode of manuring the land is similar to that practised in Brabant, and
the produce proves that it is excellent; for no better meadows, or corn
land in a higher state of cultivation are to be seen than in some parts we
have lately passed through.

The cows, when fresh in milk, are milked three times a day, by which means
more milk is obtained than in the common method; any one wishing to make a
fair experiment of this must try it not for two or three days only, but
for a week or ten days.


John and Martha Yeardley found the institution at Fredericks-Oort of a
deeply interesting kind. It was Established by private benevolence to
improve the condition of the poor, and to relieve the country from
beggars, and was commenced in 1818. The poor families which are placed
there are employed, some in manufacture, some in cultivating the soil, and
every means is made use of to encourage industry and provident habits.
When our friends visited the colony, it comprised 2900 souls, including
the staff by which the institution is worked, and which is necessarily
numerous. They thought the method of instruction in use in the schools
excellent, and found that religious liberty was strictly respected.

From Fredericks-Oort they went on to Ommershaus, where is the poor-house
and penal colony belonging to the former institution. Thirteen hundred
beggary, orphans, and criminals were then in the colony.


How much, remarks J.Y., such an institution is wanted in England; every
inducement is held out for improvement in civil society, and a most
effectual check placed against vice and idleness.


The travellers fared badly in Holland, and they were rejoiced to "set foot
again in honest Germany, where they know how to use strangers with an
honest heart." They returned through Bentheim and Osnabrueck, and arrived
at Pyrmont on the 19th. Here they spent ten days in resting, and in
preparing to pursue their journey through South Germany.

On First-day, the 30th, they took leave of their friends.


First-day, says John Yeardley, was a solemn time, both at meeting and at
the reading in the afternoon; I hope both my M.Y. and I were enabled to
clear our minds. In the evening we took an affectionate and affecting
leave of them all; it was to me particularly trying. I could not refrain
from weeping much.


Not much occurs in the diary to claim attention, until they reached
Friedberg, not far from Frankfort.


10 _mo_. 7.--Sat down to our little meeting, after breakfast, and
reading, on First day morning. It was to us both a season of deep feeling.
My dear M.Y. was so filled with a sense of our own weakness, and the
Almighty's goodness towards us in a wilderness travel through a dark
country, that she knelt, and was enabled to pour forth a heart-felt
supplication for a precious seed of the kingdom in the hearts of the
people among whom we were; and also that He would in his tender mercy
remember us his poor instruments, and in the right time cause light to
break forth on our path, preserve us in the way we ought to go, and make
us willing to suffer for the sake of his suffering cause: to which my
heart said, Amen!


At Frankfort they formed acquaintance with J.H. von Meyer, ex-burgomaster
of the city, a learned and pious man, who had made a new translation of
the Bible into German, and had stood firm for the cause of real
Christianity in the midst of much declension. In the afternoon they drove
to Offenbach to see J.D. Marc, a Christian Jew, who had earned experience
in the school of suffering. He said, amongst other things, that he could
never preach but when he believed it to be his duty, and then he could
declare only what was given him at the time; this he considered to be the
only preaching that could profit the hearers. His views on the inutility
of water baptism were so decided, that when converted Jews asked him to
administer to them this rite, he told them he could not recommend it, for
it would do them no good. He gave them many names of awakened persons in
the Palatinate:--


Where, says John Yeardley, there is still a lively-spirited people who hold
meetings for religious improvement; perhaps the descendants of those who
were visited by W. Penn in former days.


The next day they returned to Frankfort, and made the acquaintance of
Pastor Appia, a Piedmontese, who, with his wife, was very friendly; and
when he heard that they had left their own land to visit his native
country, marked out a route for them, and gave them letters of
introduction. "When I am with such good people," observes J.Y., in
relating their interview with Appia, "I am always uneasy in my mind that I
am not more worthy. May the Lord strengthen me!"

On the 10th, they went to Darmstadt, where they met with several
enlightened Christians. One of these, Leander van Ess, had been a Roman
Catholic priest; and although a zealous promoter of Christianity in the
face of persecution, and favored with a more than ordinary degree of
spiritual light, he had thought it right not altogether to forsake that
communion, but remained amongst the Romanists to do them good. He had
translated the New Testament for their use. At parting with his new
friends he embraced them, gave them his blessing, and wished them a
prosperous journey. "I felt myself," says J.Y., "comforted and
strengthened by this visit."


On the way to Heppenheim, he continues, (to which place they next directed
their course), I felt quiet, in mind, and was once more assured that we
were in the way of our duty. As I thought of the difficulties which might
await us, these words were brought to my remembrance, "Touch not mine
anointed, and do my prophets no harm."


Crossing the Rhine, at Mannheim, they stopped, on the 12th, at Duerkheim,
where they became acquainted with Ludwig Fitz, a man of a frank and
inquiring disposition.


For three years, writes J.Y., he has held meetings in his house; in the
commencement he had to suffer no little persecution. On his entering our
room he observed that it was the Lord who had thus brought us together. I
have scarcely been half an hour with you, he said, after a while, but it
seems as if I had known you for seven years. He, with his wife and
daughter, took us to call on a Mennonist, a pious man, who holds firmly by
Baptism and the Supper. He soon began to speak on these points. I replied
to what he said as well as I could, maintaining that in Scripture there
are two baptisms spoken of; that, as the soul of man is spiritual, it can
be reached only by that which is spiritual, and that therefore I did not
see the necessity of maintaining that which, is outward. He said he
desired to possess the former, and not to neglect the latter. As to the
Supper they both advanced is proof of the observance being good, that
often, whilst using it, they experienced inward joy and refreshment. I
said we must not limit to a certain time or place this joy in the Lord, as
if the use of the Supper only were the cause of it. The gracious Lord is
ready at all times to sup with us, and to refresh the sincere and cleansed
soul, and make it joyful in him. We took leave of each other in love; I
said we did not travel for the purpose of turning people from one form to
another, but with the desire only that they might all be brought nearer to
the Lord. It was pleasant to me that Fitz's wife was with us; during the
conversation she remained still and weighty in spirit.

We inclined to attend the evening devotion at Fitz's, but prefaced our
request with the hope that they would not be offended if we did not take
part in their observances. This was immediately granted; and Fitz said, I
feel that your spirit is true and sincere, and I have unity with it. When
their service was ended, we asked them to remain a while in silence, and I
trust may say we were enabled to utter what was required of us in
testimony and supplication.

In Duerkheim there are eleven converted Jews, who dare not meet except in
secret for fear of the rabbins. One night the rabbins attempted to take
away their bibles and other books, but they received a hint of their
intention, and sent the books to Fitz's house. One of them, a servant
girl, as soon as she heard that some Christian friends were come into the
town, went to Fitz's, and took up one of the books we had given him. She
read a little in it hastily, put it in her bosom, and ran home. Her
curiosity and love of the truth impelled her to come to our hotel, and
wait unobserved in the hall to catch a glimpse of us as we came out. We
felt much for these awakened ones of Abraham's offspring; their oppressed
condition rested much upon our hearts; but as we had no opportunity of
conversing with them, I wrote a few lines from Friedelsheim to the young
woman, and sent them with some books by Fitz, who accompanied us to that
place. _Tuke's Principles_ finds much entrance among the awakened
Jews.


Travelling through Spires, Carlsruhe, and Pforzheim, they came on the 16th
to Stuttgardt, where they found Henry Kienlin, of Pforzheim, who, as the
reader will remember, had won so large a place in their love and esteem on
their former journey.


He not only, says John Yeardley, professes our principles, but bears a
clear and fearless testimony for them. His wife is of the same mind with
him, although she does not yet show it in the simplicity of her dress.

On the 18th, we set out in company with our good friend to Ludwigsburg to
see the prison. There are about 600 prisoners, of both sexes, for the most
part employed in labor. Order and cleanliness prevail, and the food is
good. The governor, Kleth, is a worthy, pious man; he himself reads the
Holy Scriptures to the prisoners, and endeavors to promote their spiritual
improvement. When we entered a room in which were a number of men, they
rose, and stood serious and quiet as though they expected we should
address them; and for a short time the love of God was felt amongst us in
an impressive manner; but nothing was given us to utter.


It will be recollected that when John and Martha Yeardley were at
Stuttgardt in 1826, they met with the Pastor Hoffman, and that they
desired to visit the institution at Kornthal, of which he was the
director, but were obliged to forego this visit in order to hasten forward
to Basle. They now prepared to discharge this debt of Christian love.
Kornthal is situated four miles from Stuttgardt; it was founded in 1819 by
dissenters from the Moravians and Lutherans, and consisted in 1825 of
about seventy families. J. and M.Y. went there on the 19th.


We were received, says the former, in a brotherly manner by the Director
Hoffman. On entering the room we were informed that their pastor had died
the night before; but instead of sorrow there seemed to be joy. This
society holds it for a religious duty to rejoice when any of their members
are favored to enter a state of endless bliss. This is religious fortitude
which but few possess, but I believe it is with them sincere, for in going
over the institution with the Director, I observed they spoke of it as a
matter of holy triumph.


No meeting was held with the members of the establishment during this
visit; it was left for J. and M.Y. to attend the usual evening assembly on
First-day, the 21st; and they were informed that it would be an occasion
on which any present who were moved by divine influence might freely
relieve their minds.


At three o'clock, J.Y. writes, we set off to Kornthal under most trying
feelings; I do not know when I have suffered so much from discouragement.
On account of the death of the pastor, many were come to attend the
interment which was to take place the next day. This caused the meeting to
be large; not less than 700 persons were present, and among them six or
seven pastors. The service commenced with a few verses; the first words
were these:--


    "Holy Spirit come unto us,
     And make our hearts thy dwelling-place."


I can truly say I was awfully impressed with their meaning, and a secret
prayer rose in my heart that it might be experienced amongst us. After the
singing, a silence truly solemn ensued, and I intimated that I felt an
impression to say a few words. When I sat down our kind friend the
Director summed up the substance of what I had said, and repeated it in an
impressive and becoming manner. He did this with the idea that some
present who only understood Low German might not have clearly got the
sense; however, we were told afterwards that they had understood every
word that I had said. Hoffman generously acknowledged to the hearers that
what had been delivered was strictly conformable with Scripture doctrine,
and that he united most fully with it.

Next morning the children being assembled for religious instruction, at
the conclusion I requested they might remain awhile, and I had a few words
to say to them, which was a relief to my mind. Hoffman asked if they had
understood; they almost all answered, Ja, ja, ja.

This visit has afforded an opportunity of our becoming acquainted with
many serious characters out of the neighborhood who were come to the
interment; many of them felt near to me in spirit. Hoffman's wife is a
precious, still character; there is much sweetness in her countenance. All
received us heartily in Christian love; it felt to me as if it were the
night before one of our Monthly Meetings, and I was at a Friend's house,
so much freedom was to be felt. The inn is kept by Hoffman; they would
make us no charge, saying love must pay all. We were most easy to make a
present to the box for the institution, but they would have refused it,
saying feelingly, Travellers like you have many expenses.


The cause for J.Y.'s peculiar discouragement in the prospect of this
meeting was the want of an interpreter. Any one who knows the difficulty
of public speaking or continuous discourse in a foreign language, will
comprehend the anxiety which he felt when he saw no alternative but that
of committing himself to preach in German. Though very familiar with the
language, he never completely overcame the want of early and of thoroughly
grammatical instruction in that difficult and intricate tongue. It was
with feelings of this kind that he penned the following memorandum before
going to Kornthal:--


18_th_.--Extremely low in mind and in want of faith. No creature can
conceive what I suffer in the prospect of having to speak in a foreign
tongue in a religious meeting.


At Stuttgardt they took leave of their endeared friend, Henry Kienlin.


It is, says J.Y., hard to part; but every one must follow his calling,
and mind only the direction of the Lord.


On quitting Stuttgardt, John Yeardley makes a few remarks regarding the
religious state of Wuertemberg.


22_nd_.--Wuertemberg is a favored land. In Feldbach, three hours from
Stuttgardt, there are about 800 Christian people who hold meetings in each
other's houses: some of them belong to the Kornthal Society. Years ago,
many emigrated to America and Russia, to gain religious liberty; now it is
granted them by their own Government.


On the 22nd, they journeyed to Tuebingen, where they visited the worthy
Professor Streundel.


He was surprised and shy when we entered, as if he wanted to say, The
sooner you take leave the better. But as soon as he knew where we came
from, his countenance changed, and he received us heartily. He had his
wife called--a very polite person. He asked many questions as to our
church discipline, &c.; the order of our Society pleased him much. He had
undertaken the study of divinity from an apprehension of duty, and said
that it was only by the assistance of the Holy Spirit we could be made
instrumental in the ministry.


On the 25th they came to Wilhelmsdorf, on the Lake of Constance, where is
a branch of the Kornthal Association. They found the director "a man of
great simplicity, but of inward worth."


He was, continues John Yeardley, six years in Kornthal, and seems to be
sensible of the importance of the situation he fills, and of his
incapability to be useful to others unless assisted by divine grace. He
read our certificate attentively, and said, in a weighty manner, Yes; one
Lord over all, one faith, one baptism. We found they have no regular
preacher, but meet for worship every evening and on First-day mornings. We
were desirous of seeing them together, and they were pleased to find such
was our intention. The bell was rung, and in a few minutes the whole
colony assembled, about two hundred, with children. Much liberty was felt
in speaking among them; and some of them appeared to be sensible of the
value of true silence, and from whence words ought to spring; many shed
tears under the melting influence of divine love which was so preciously
to be felt amongst us. We took an affectionate leave, well satisfied in
visiting this little company, to strengthen them to hold up the cause of
their Lord and Master, in the midst of darkness. Within about thirty
English miles there are none but rigid Roman Catholics, not one
Evangelical congregation. At our departure my wife said: "These words
arise in my mind for thy comfort: Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace."

At the inn where we stopped at Wilhelmsdorf, we were spectators of an
occurrence rarely to be seen. Among the laborers who dined there, the one
who had finished first read a chapter from the Bible to the rest. When all
had done eating, one offered a prayer; and then all went quietly back to
their work. This practice shows at least the sincerity of their hearts.




CHAPTER IX.


THE SECOND CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1827-28.

PART II.--SWITZERLAND.

On the 27th of the Tenth Month John and Martha Yeardley crossed the Swiss
frontier to Schaffhausen, where their presence was welcomed by several
pious persons. Amongst these were a young woman, Caroline Keller, who from
a religions motive had altered her dress and manners to greater
simplicity, and John Lang, Principal of the United Brethren's Society. In
a social meeting convened on the evening of their arrival, J.L. directed
the conversation to the principles of friends, and J. and M.Y. explained
the views held by the Society on silent worship, the ministry, and the
disuse of ceremonies.


The [French] language, says J.Y., was difficult to me; but by the grace
of God I was helped, and they were quite ready to seize the sense of what
we endeavored to convey. The love of God was felt among us, and the
Principal said, at parting, that he had not before been so impressed with
our views. I sent him Tuke's "Principles," and he told me yesterday he was
attentively studying it. My dear M.Y. told me it had been given her to
believe we were in our right place, and that we were called by religious
intercourse to bear witness for our Lord and Master and his good cause.

I am afraid, he remarks in a letter in which he describes their service at
Schaffhausen, I am afraid thou wilt think me too minute in my details; but
really when I enter into the feeling which accompanied us in these visits,
it seems as if I could scarcely quit it.


They spent the 29th at Schaffhausen in close Christian communion with two
pious families. To C.K. particularly, at whose house they dined, they felt
so nearly united, that they scarcely knew how to part from her.


We have cause to be thankful, says J.Y., for our visit to Schaffhausen;
but if we were more faithful we should be more useful. Our friends were
quite inclined for us to have had a meeting with them, but we were too
fearful to propose it. O vile weakness!


On the 31st they saw the Agricultural School for poor children at Beuggen.
Amongst the boys were twelve young Greeks, who were being instructed in
ancient and modern Greek, and in German. They had been sent to Switzerland
by the German missionaries, and most of them had been deprived of their
parents by the cruelty of the Turks. It was the intention of their
benefactors that they should return to Greece to enlighten their
countrymen. Their religious instruction was based simply upon the Bible,
without reference to any particular creed.


In the Greek school, writes John Yeardley, we observed a serious man about
thirty years of age, who had the appearance of a laborer, learning Greek.
This was a little surprising, and led us to inquire the cause. The
inspector readily gratified us: and gratifying indeed it was to hear that
this poor man had given up his work of ship-carpenter, from pure
conviction that he was called to go and instruct the poor Greeks at his
own expense. He is intending to spend the winter in learning the modern
Greek, and to proceed in the spring to Corfu. He intends to provide for
his own living by working at his trade, and he will take for instruction
about four boys at a time, and as soon as he has brought them forward
enough, set them as monitors over others. Some time ago two young men were
sent out by the Bible Society to Corfu; but before they reached the place
of their destination they were deterred by the missionaries on account of
the unsettled state of the country, and dared not proceed further for fear
of losing their lives. It is remarkable that, at the juncture when these
two young men were turned back by discouragement, this poor man should
receive the impression to go to the same place. We desired to have an
interview with him, and he was instantly sent for to the Inspector's room.
After a few remarks which opened for us to make to him, he confessed he
had no peace but when he thought of giving up to this feeling of duty, and
that when he looked towards going he felt happy in the prospect of every
hardship. It was remarked that, as this call was made from above, the
great Master alone could guide his steps; he appeared fully sensible from
whom his help must come. He is beloved by his employers, and has an
excellent certificate from the pastor, of his moral and religious
character.


On the 2nd of the Eleventh Month they went to Zurich, and the same day
drove out over a very bad road to Pfaeffikon to visit the Herr von
Campagne.


We had a cold wet journey, but the good old man gave us a hearty welcome
to his house. He is seventy-six years of age. He asked us pleasantly how
we came to think of visiting an old man who was on the brink of the grave.
He had heard much of Friends, and wished, he said, to become personally
acquainted with some of the Society. He is a most benevolent character,
but we could not unite with all his religious views; he does not think it
necessary to meet for religious worship; in short, his principles are much
the same as those held by Jacob Boehmen.

We slept at his house, and next morning returned to Zurich, where we
called on our particular friend Professor Gessner and his family, and we
rejoiced mutually to see each other again.


In the afternoon they called on Pastor Koch, tutor to the young Prince of
Mecklenburg, who was at that time in Switzerland, and the next morning,
First-day, as they were holding their little meeting for worship, the
Prince himself, with Herr Koch and the Herr von Brandenstein, gave them a
visit. The Prince spoke English; and J.Y. says:--


I had a strong impression to speak to him in a serious way, which I was
enabled to do at some length. On parting he held me with both his hands in
mine, and said, "I thank you, sir, for your kind and instructive
communication; I shall never forget it so long as I live."

A little before twelve o'clock, he continues, came our kind young friend,
Hannah Gessner, to accompany us to the ancient and worthy Bishop Hess. He
is in his eighty-seventh year, but lively in spirit and active in mind. He
is uncommonly liberal in his religious opinions, and his enlarged heart
seemed to overflow with Christian love towards the followers of Christ
under every name. He treated us as a father, and I felt instructed in
being in his company. He gave us his portrait as a token of respect and
friendship.

In the evening we took tea with Professor Gessner's sister, Lavater, in
company with seven of the professor's daughters and sons, who are all
serious persons. After some conversation on the order and ministry of our
Society, it was proposed by dear Hannah, through her aunt, whether we
would like to have a Meeting or the Scriptures read. After a portion of
Scripture had been read silence ensued, in which my dear M. Y. and I said
what was on our minds in testimony and supplication. It is a time of
precious visitation to some of them. We felt sweet unity with Pastor
Gessner, and believe him to be a gospel minister. On parting he took me in
both arms, and said, in such a feeling manner that the words went to my
very heart, "The Lord bless thee, and put the words of his wisdom into thy
mouth."


On the 6th they went to Berne, and the next morning they inspected
Fellenberg's institution at Hofwyl.


It is, says John Yeardley, what it professes to be, for education in the
fullest extent of the word, to give to those committed to their care an
education suited to their circumstances and their future prospects in
life. There is a first-rate boarding school, for young gentlemen; a middle
school, for tradesmen, &c.; a [boys' and] girls' poor school of industry,
for those who can pay nothing.--(_Letter to Josiah Forster_.)


To J.Y. the most interesting department of this institution was the school
of industry for poor children, in which at that time a hundred boys were
clothed and educated. He describes at some length, and with evident
approbation, the system on which the school was conducted; but adds, "I
cannot say much as to religious instruction."

From Hofwyl they proceeded through Lausanne to Geneva, where, being
desirous of improving themselves in French, and the season not permitting
them to travel, they hired a lodging, intending to remain two or three
months.

As on their former visit, they held frequent intercourse with pious
persons, several of them well known in the Christian world; such as
Gaussen, Bost, and L'Huillier. Of Theodore L'Huillier. minister of the New
Church, John Yeardley says:--


Though a moderate Calvinist, he embraced us at once on the broad principle
of Christianity. We became acquainted with him two years ago, but think
him now much deeper in the root of real religion.

11 _mo_. 19.--We called yesterday evening on our dear friend Owen,
and met there a pious lady, Fanny Passavant. We had much serious
conversation, I hope to profit, at least to our own minds; for we were
given to see a little the importance of the situation in which we stand,
and the necessity of being, in our intercourse with these religious
persons, wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

1828. 1 mo. 13.--We have had much satisfaction in becoming acquainted with
Ami Bost. He was one of the first who bore testimony to the light which
broke forth in the corrupt church of Geneva, and he suffered much in
defending the doctrines of the New Church. In Germany he was, with his
wife and six or seven children, driven from town to town by the police,
for holding religious meetings in his house, and for refusing to have his
children baptised. His sentiments in the office of the ministry and the
appointment of preachers, are in perfect unison with those of Friends;
also on the ordinances of the Supper, &c.

1 _mo_. 20.--During the greater part of our stay at this place I have felt
my mind extremely poor, but a secret desire and prayer has been maintained
to be preserved in patience, believing it to be as necessary to learn to
suffer as to do. And although it is apparently little we can do here, we
have felt repeatedly the assurance that it is the ordering of Best Wisdom,
and as such we are well satisfied.

After our little morning meeting we went to dine with dear Captain Owen,
and spent the remainder of the day with a few religious friends there.
When the evening reading was finished, we had a solemn time under the
seasoning influence of divine love. Our hearts were too full for any
religious communication, except supplication, which was offered both by my
dear M.Y. and myself.


Martha Yeardley also gives an account of this meeting, and of a visit they
paid to the Female Prison.


Before our departure for Lausanne and Neufchatel, a relation of Mary Ann
Vernet's kindly attended us to the female prison, and introduced us to
others of the committee; and in the evening we had a religious opportunity
with the few confined there, during which they evinced much feeling. Our
interesting companion told us the next morning that she trusted the
circumstance would be blessed to them. We had also a very interesting
opportunity at Charles Owen's the evening before we left, at which was
present, as often before, a very precious friend of ours, of the name of
Fanny Passavant, a single woman, very rich, yet who lives in great
self-denial, and gives almost all she has to feed the poor. She is what
they call in this country a very _interior_ character; which means
one that cherishes the inward life. In her company we often felt baptized
together, and she gave us strong recommendations to some of the same class
at Neufchatel, who are desiring to learn in the school of
Christ.--(_Letter to Elizabeth Dudley_.)


At the expiration of their sojourn in Geneva, they did not, as they had
expected to do, proceed to the valleys of Piedmont, but, as the last
extract intimates, turned their steps towards Neufchatel. The motives
which influenced them in this change of purpose are described by John
Yeardley, in a letter to his brother, of the 11th of the Second Month,
1828.


In my last to thee I signified our intention of departing for the valleys
of Piedmont, which did not take place. After due consideration of the
subject for more than two months, in a state of humble resignation to be
directed aright in this important matter, we did not feel it press with
sufficient weight on our minds to warrant our moving in the face of so
much difficulty as is at present in the way. We have always considered our
safety in such engagements to depend on taking step by step in the fresh
light afforded; and it is a favor to know when and where to stand, as well
as when to go forward.


While the way to Piedmont was thus for a time obstructed, a door was set
open for them in a part of Switzerland which they had not yet visited.
From John Yeardley's reflections before they left Geneva, it would appear
that in the discouragement they felt in the prospect of a long journey
through France, they were little aware of that plentiful repast of
spiritual food which was to be served to them before they would have to
cross the Jura.


In looking towards the long journey before us, writes J.Y., I have been
much discouraged, almost fearing to depart from this place without first
being favored with more quietude of mind, which I was this morning favored
to feel in a greater degree than has been the case for a long time. In my
last solitary walk to La Traille, I was led to pray in secret for
preservation on our journey, and almost to ask an assurance of protection,
but received for answer, "Go, in faith."


On the 21st of the First Month, they left Geneva and went forward to
Lausanne, where they were again refreshed with the society of some
spiritually-minded persons.


23_rd_--We visited several of the pastors. We found M. Fevaz,
minister of the Seceders in this place, very interesting, humble, and
spiritual. He related to us, in much simplicity and candor, that in the
commencement of their separation they were strenuous to preach doctrinal
sermons, but now they had been favored to see the necessity of preaching
purification of heart through the operation of the Spirit.

Called on ---- Gaudin, who keeps a boarding-school in a beautiful
situation near the town. We had not been long in the company of him and
his dear wife, before we felt much contrited together, and had a precious
religious opportunity. At parting, the dear man, with myself, was quite
broken into tears. We left with him, as well as with the others, Judge
Hale's "Testimony to the Secret Support of Divine Providence," which we
had translated, and had got printed at Geneva.

On the 24th they proceeded to Neufchatel. This was a memorable visit.


We soon found cause, writes John Yeardley, to believe the Great Master had
been before us, to prepare the way in the hearts of many to receive the
doctrine he has mercifully enabled us to preach. Our dear F. Passavant had
given us a letter of introduction to Auguste Borel, a man of few words,
but of a remarkably weighty and sweet spirit, who received us with the
greatest affection. He has lately separated from the national worship, and
retires in silence in his own chamber. He soon made us acquainted with a
few others of a similar turn of mind.


Martha Yeardley, describing the commencement of their religious service in
this place, says:--


We were invited to a meeting which we felt most easy to attend, and my
husband was given full liberty to speak if he felt inclined; but for a
while the usual activity of their meetings--such as singing, commenting on
texts with Calvinistic explanations, &c.--entirely closed our way. But
before they separated I ventured to request, in the name of my husband,
that such as inclined would favor us with their company a while longer,
and rest a little in silence. Nearly all remained, and under a solemn
covering he addressed the company, while I translated in much fear, yet
ventured at the end to say a few words for myself. Several of the company
attended us home, and expressed much satisfaction: and from this time a
door was opened to us at Neufchatel in a very remarkable manner. They
flocked to our inn at all times in the day and in considerable numbers,
many acknowledging, in the course of very interesting conversation, that
they thirsted for something more satisfying than mere doctrines
continually repeated--something that would preserve from evil, that would
cleanse the heart, that would bring into nearer communion with the
Saviour.--(_Letter to Elizabeth Dudley_.)

On the 27th, continues the Diary, A. Borel conducted us to a meeting with
some _interior_ persons, about three miles from town. It was a time
of close exercise of mind, but ended to satisfaction, and, I hope, to the
edification and strength of some present. The master of the house,
Professor Petavel, said that never until that evening had he been able to
see clearly the beauty and advantage of pure spiritual worship, contrasted
with outward forms.

After, having taken tea with a large company, our kind guide conducted us
through woods and over mountainous and bad roads to a village, where a
large concourse of people were assembled for worship. A schoolmaster was
speaking on a chapter which had been read: we had full unity with what he
delivered, which was accompanied with a power which convinced us that he
really preached the gospel. After he had done, we were introduced as
religious strangers from England; and silence ensuing, opportunity was
given for us to express what came before us.

28th.--Some of the most _interior_ told us they had long been
exercised about spiritual worship, and had often wished to see some of the
Society of Friends. On hearing of our intended visit two years ago, they
said if we had come then [we should have found them] wrapped up in
doctrines, but now they were given to see they could not live on the
letter alone, they must be born again, and partake of that bread which
cometh down from heaven. Many of these awakened persons came to our inn at
all hours, and our hearts were filled with love towards them as a cup
overflowing; so that it was given to us to minister to them almost
individually as they came to us.


On the 29th they went to Berne, and the following morning walked over to
Wabern, where some of A. Borel's friends resided, who received them with
open arms.


After dinner M. Combe drove us in his car to Scherli. We alighted at the
house of one of the peasant-farmers, situated quite among the mountains,
with the Alps fair in view. They received us in the name of disciples with
every mark of love and respect. They were more disposed to sit in silence
than to ask questions. On my asking if they had seen or heard of any of
our Friends, in these parts, one of them, innocently replied, No; we do
not know anything of your religious principles. I then began to explain
them; and when I spoke of our manner of worship, belief, &c., and of some
of our peculiar tenets respecting Baptism, the Supper, &c., it is not
possible to express their emotion; their eyes turned first towards one and
then towards another, and seemed to sparkle with joy, without their
uttering a word till I had done. These were entirely the principles they
held, and about a year ago they separated from the church, about twenty in
number, and attempted to meet for religious worship. This was prevented by
the police; for although, they live in a very remote situation, they are
strictly watched by the pastor, who wishes to compel them to come to his
worship. We were there only an hour or two, but a number of these
innocent-hearted people came flocking to the house, and immediately
settled into a silence truly solemn. We could indeed say our hearts burned
with love towards them.

Two of these young men came to us the nest day, and spent most of the day
with us. One of them, Christian Speicher, told me he did not know how to
express the satisfaction he felt to hear of a body of professing
Christians in a distant land, who held the same religious principles as
they in their isolated situation had been long seeking after and had been
made willing to suffer for.

During our stay under this hospitable roof [M. Combe's at Wabern] it was
an open house for all comers, and they were not few. Our spirits were so
united with many of them we did not know how to leave them; but our great
concern was to recommend them to remain with Him who had so mercifully and
powerfully visited them.


On the 31st they returned to Berne, and the next day called upon a pious
chimney-sweeper, waiting whilst he changed his sooty clothes.

We were not a little surprised to hear him of his own accord, without
knowing who we were, declare the same doctrine as we are concerned to
preach. There are a few _inward_ persons who assemble at his house,
and hold the same sentiments. About a year and a half or two years ago,
there was a remarkable awakening in the canton of Berne, and a few here
and there of a more spiritually-minded sort seceded. There is a ferment to
prevent their meeting together, and to compel them to go to the usual
place of worship; but in vain, for nothing but spiritual food can satisfy
their hungry souls.


On their return to Neufchatel they visited the celebrated school of the
Moravians at Montmirail, where, says Martha Yeardley--


We soon felt quite at home with a precious, spiritually-minded man, the
master, and his agreeable English wife. This is an excellent institution,
for females only, and several English are there. We were about seventy in
company at dinner, and much sweet feeling prevailed. The master of this
interesting family was delighted to hear something of Friends to whom he
had never before been introduced.


At Neufchatel, on First-day (2 mo. 3,) they met large companies in the
morning and evening, and the next morning took leave of their friends in
that city, "deeply humbled under a sense of the great Master's work among
them." They went to Locle under the conduct of A. Borel, whose "kindness
exceeded all description."


On the way, writes John Yeardley, we took refreshment at a pious man's
house in the morning, and dined at another friend's, with whom, we had a
precious religious opportunity. It reminded me of the mode of visiting our
own dear Friends in England; we find in the hearts of these visited
children of the Universal Parent genuine hospitality; they hand us of all
they have in their houses in the name of disciples.

At Locle they were met by Mary Anne Calame, with whom their hearts became
instantly knit in the strongest Christian friendship.


She came before we were well alighted. We had heard much of the character
and benevolent exertions of this dear woman but could say in truth the
half had not been told us. Her countenance is strong and impressive, her
hair jet black, cut short, and worn without cap; her dress of the most
simple and least costly kind. Her sole desire seems to be to do the will
of her Lord and Master in caring for 170 poor children, who are in the
institution at bed, board, and instruction. The forenoon was spent in
looking over the schools and hearing the children examined. The house is a
refuge for the lame, blind, deaf, dumb, and sick. Peace and contentment
prevail through the whole. This establishment was commenced about twelve
years ago with five children, and has prospered in a remarkable manner.
M.A.C. is one with Friends in principle, and, as well as some others of
the family, entirely separated from the usual forms of worship.


Martha Yeardley, in a letter from which we have already quoted, describes
the origin of the asylum.


About twelve years since M.A. Calame believed herself called to form an
institution for orphans and unfortunate children. She associated some
others with her for this object, but having peculiar views on religious
subjects, and more perseverance than her colleagues, she was soon left
nearly alone, with means entirely inadequate to the increasing demands,
viz., about three francs yearly from a very limited number of persons. The
children daily augmented, and she dared not refuse admission: when in
necessity she was encouraged to trust from unexpected donations. This
increased her faith; and after some years, a boys' school was added. In
this way the institution has been supported without any regular funds.

Her faith is still often very severely tried, but they have never yet been
suffered to want. Her refuge in times of extremity is prayer, and it has
been in some instances very evidently answered, so that she has severely
reproached herself for daring to doubt. In speaking on this subject she
said to me: "I am at times much beset with temptations when I consider the
number I have thus collected without any visible or certain means of
support; but how can I dare to doubt after so many proofs of the care of
the great Master? He knows our wants; he knows these dear children have
need of food and clothing, and he provides it for them; and he knows that
all I desire is to do his will."

On remarking to her the sweet tranquillity and order which reign in these
schools, she said, "It is the Master's work; they are taught to love him
above all, and to do all for his sake." We felt very nearly united to her
and to an intimate friend who resides with her: they are both what are
called deeply interior characters, and have long withdrawn from the places
of public worship, but fully unite with our views.

She is really a very extraordinary character, extremely simple and
cheerful in her manners, possessing great natural talents, and evincing in
her conducting of the institution, not only the Spirit, but the
understanding also.--(_To Elizabeth Dudley, 2 mo. 7, 1828._)


With Locle, John and Martha Yeardley's mission to Switzerland for this
time terminated. They crossed the frontier into France, and made the best
of their way through that country, in order to proceed to the Channel
Islands.


This morning (2 mo. 5,) writes J.Y., Mary Anne Calame and her friend
Zimmerling, with A. Borel, accompanied us two leagues to the ferry, and
saw us safe over into France. This last parting with friends so dear to us
in a foreign land, was very touching; our hearts were humbled under a
sense of the Heavenly Father's love.

6th.--Passing the custom-house made us late at our quarters, where they
are not accustomed to receive such guests. Their curiosity to see and know
who we are is very great. To prevent French imposition, my M.Y. was to
bargain beforehand for what we had. On asking what the meal would cost, we
were answered they could not tell, for they did not know how much coffee
we should drink. This simple but appropriate reply so amused us that it
put an end to our bargaining.

I shall not soon forget the sensation I felt on passing the river into
France. I could not forbear drawing the discouraging contrast of quitting
those to whom we had become united in the gospel of peace, in a country
the most beautiful that Nature can present, with a long journey in
prospect through a dreary country whose inhabitants wish only to get what
they can from us. These discouraging fears could only be silenced by
reflecting that the same protecting Providence presides over all and
everywhere.


Travelling with their own single horse, their favorite _Poppet_, the
progress they made was necessarily slow, and they did not reach Paris till
the 19th. After spending a few days in that city, they proceeded to
Cherbourg, and arrived there after six days of hard travelling. At this
place John Yeardley writes:--


3 _mo_. 2.--In looking back on our late travels, a degree of sweet
peace and thankfulness covered my mind in the humble belief that our weak
but sincere desires to do the great Master's will was a sacrifice
well-pleasing in his holy sight. In looking forward to the dangers we had
still to encounter, I was led closely to examine on what our hope of
preservation was fixed. Should it please Him who had hitherto blessed us
with his presence and protecting care, to put our faith again to the test,
how we could bear it, how we should feel at the prospect of going down to
the bottom of the great deep. I felt a particular satisfaction that our
great journey had first been accomplished; if this had not been the case
it would have been a sting in my conscience. But now an awful resignation
was experienced, and it came before me as an imperious duty to be resigned
to life or death; and the joyful hope resounded in my heart, All will be
well to those who love not their lives unto death.


The presentiment of danger which this passage describes was speedily
fulfilled, as was also the hopeful promise by which it was accompanied.
They were detained at Cherbourg until the 13th, waiting for a vessel.
Leaving port early that morning, they landed in Guernsey the next day; and
it was in going ashore that they were exposed to some danger of their
lives. John Yeardley thus relates the occurrence:--


I descended first into a little boat, and standing on the side to take my
M.Y. down, the man not holding the boat secure to the ship, our weight
pushed it from us, and we plunged headlong into the sea. My dear M.Y.'s
clothes prevented her from sinking, and she was first assisted again into
the boat. I went overhead, and had to swim several turns before I could
reach the boat. The salt water being warm, and the time not long, we
received no further injury. What shall we render unto the Lord for all his
mercies to us, his poor unworthy servants! how often has he made bare his
mighty arm for our deliverance. In the midst of danger fear was removed
from us, and we were blessed with the unspeakable advantage of presence of
mind, and enabled to use the best means under Divine Providence to save
our lives.

They visited the Friends and a few other persons in Guernsey and Jersey,
and then proceeded to Weymouth, and on the 25th to Bristol. At Bristol
and Tewkesbury they were deeply interested in the state of the meetings,
and had some remarkable service in both places. Taking also Nottingham and
Chesterfield in their way, and being "well satisfied in not having overrun
them," they arrived at the cottage at Burton on the 8th of the Fourth
Month, having been absent about nine months.


In the retrospect, say they, of this long and arduous journey, we have
this testimony unitedly to bear,--that the Arm of divine love has been
underneath to support and help us; and although we have had many deep
baptisms to pass through, especially when we beheld how in many places the
fields are white unto harvest, and were fully sensible of our own
inability to labor therein, yet He who, we trust, sent us forth was often
pleased to raise us from the depth of discouragement, to rejoice in him
our Saviour. If any fruits arise from our feeble efforts to promote his
cause, it will be from his blessing resting upon them, for nothing can
possibly be attached to us but weakness and want of faith. But, blessed be
his holy name, he knew the sincerity of our endeavors to do his will, and
has been pleased in his condescending mercy to fill our hearts with his
enriching peace. Amen.




CHAPTER X.


HOME OCCUPATIONS AND TRAVELS IN ENGLAND AND WALES.

1828--1833.

On their return home Martha Yeardley was attacked with a severe illness,
consequent probably on hard travelling and bad accommodation during the
journey.

Under date of the 18th of the Fifth Month, J.Y. writes:--


How circumstances change! Last Yearly Meeting we were in London with the
prospect of a long journey before us, and now my dear Martha is on a bed
of sickness, and I have myself suffered; but through all there is a degree
of peaceful resignation in the belief that all is done well that the Great
Master does, and that what He keeps is well kept.


Later in the day he thus continues his Diary:--


This has been a day of great trial on account of my dear Martha being much
worse. My poor mind has been distressed at her weak state: I should sink
under discouragement, did I not consider that He who sends affliction can
support in it, and he who brings low can raise up in his own time, if it
be his blessed will, to which all must be submitted.


In the Seventh Month he took her to Harrowgate, where her health became
very much restored, and soon after their return they paid a religious
visit to Ackworth School and to the families of Friends in Barnsley.


Some of the opportunities at Ackworth, writes John Yeardley, were seasons
of much contrition of spirit; feeling deeply humbled under a sense of
Divine goodness and mercy in restoring this large family to usual health
after a time of deep affliction.


In the latter part of this year they were much occupied in establishing an
Infant School at Barnsley; and also in collecting and remitting
subscriptions to Mary Anne Calame for her Orphan Institution. In
acknowledging to Martha Yeardley one of these remittances, M.A.C. writes
thus:


May our Heavenly Father render thee a hundredfold what thy charity has
prompted thee to do for my numerous family of children; and may his
blessing rest on all those who have contributed to it.

We think of you every day, and we desire to live only to do the holy will
of our God. Your visit has been a testimony of his love towards us; he has
permitted that it should be blessed to us; for the remembrance of you
carries as towards Him who is the finisher of our faith, where we mingle
with you in the unfathomable sea of the divine mercy.

My large family is much blessed; good and happy tendencies manifest
themselves in many, and in general peace reigns through the house. The
assistant masters and mistresses walk more or less in the presence of the
Lord; the governess [M. Zimmerling] especially grows deeper in the divine
life: she is often ill, but she bears this cross, by the help that is
given her from above, with much submission and faith.

Last month we had the pleasure of making a little journey to Berne and the
neighborhood, to visit our friends there who love you so much. We heard
that you had both fallen into the sea, and that thou wast ill in
consequence. Thou mayst understand how the wishes of our hearts
encompassed thee; I have felt my soul for ever united to thine in the
Lord; and it seems to me that if my eyes should never again meet thine in
this land of exile, I should speedily recognize thee in the happy mansions
where the goodness of the Redeemer has prepared us a place. O, my sister,
may he bless thee, may he bless John whom he has given thee to accomplish
his work; may he open thy mouth and direct all thy steps, and give seals
to thine and thy husband's ministry, and make you increase together unto
the stature of Christ.--(12 _mo_. 14, 1828.)


The entries in the Diary at this period are not numerous: we select from
them the following short memorandum:--


1829. 4 _mo_. 9.--In our usual reading this morning, I was struck
with these words: "If two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
heaven." (Matt, xviii. 19.) A fervent desire was raised in my heart that
we might unitedly ask for faith and strength to do the will of our
Heavenly Father, and that his blessing and preservation might attend all
that concerns us.

In the Fifth Month they attended the Yearly Meeting; and John Yeardley was
present at the anniversary of the Peace Society.


5 _mo_. 19.--Attended a meeting of the Peace Society, much to my own
satisfaction. It was truly gratifying to hear from those not in profession
with us, such strong and decided sentiments against all war, as being not
only inconsistent with the spirit of Christianity, but also contrary to
sound policy. I am convinced _public_ meetings are necessary to keep
alive _public_ feeling, as well as to excite individual interest. As
it regards myself, I can say, before attending the meeting I felt but
little concern with respect to this great question.


Soon after their return home, they were comforted by the intelligence that
a few of those persons at Neufchatel who had so joyfully received their
gospel message, had found strength to establish a meeting for worship.
This information was contained in a letter from Auguste Borel, from which
the following is an extract:--


He who tries the heart, and who knew the sincerity of my desires, deigned
to hear my prayer on the 24th of February, when, without any previous
understanding, we met four in number at my house at ten o'clock in the
morning. This day is called with us _Torch Sunday_, and is a day of
rejoicing in the world; and, if I ought to say so, during my carnal life
it was to me a day of true pleasure, which I always looked for with
impatience, because of the great bonfires which are then lighted, and
which are seen from our city, illuminating every point of the wide
horizon. It is my hope that the God of love, in the analogy of the
spiritual order of things, may have kindled in our hearts his sacred fire,
and will condescend to maintain and increase it in time and in eternity.
Since that time we have continued our meetings without interruption: our
number has not yet exceeded six or seven. We do not force the work, but,
recognising that it is the Lord alone who has begun it, I feel daily more
and more that He alone ought to direct it.


A portion of this summer and autumn was occupied by John and Martha
Yeardley with holding public meetings for worship within the compass of
Pontefract and Knaresborough Monthly Meetings. Amongst the notices in the
Diary of these meetings, are the following:--


8 _mo_. 16.--A public meeting at Wooldale, to which name many more
people than could get into the house. The Friends said they never saw so
large a meeting in that place. Many of those present expressed their
satisfaction by saying they could have sat till morning to hear what was
delivered. It is an easy matter to become hearers of the word; but it was
the doers of the word that were pronounced happy.

23_rd_.--Meeting at Otley, in the Methodist chapel. It was not very
full, but very solid and satisfactory. The last public meeting in this
place was held in silence, which might probably be the cause of a small
attendance on this occasion. It is bard work to bring the people to see
and feel the advantage of silent worship: the time is not yet come, and
perhaps never may. We must be willing to help them in the way pointed out,
and try to strengthen the good in all; for if they are only brought to the
Father's house, it matters not in what way or through what medium.


In the Eleventh Month they returned to the Monthly Meeting the minute
which had been granted them, and received at the same time a certificate
to visit some meetings of Friends in the midland and south-western
counties.

Before they left home for this journey, they received intelligence that
John Yeardley's early and intimate friend James A. Wilson was no more.


11 _mo_. 24.--My heart, says J.Y., is pained within me, while I
record the loss of one with whom I have been for many years on the most
intimate terms. He has long had an afflicted tabernacle and a suffering
mind, which, I believe, contributed to his refinement, and prepared him
for the awful change. He had been recommended to go to a warmer climate,
and had taken up his residence at Glouchester, where he died, which
prevented us from attending him in his last moments. He possessed much
originality of character, joined to sincerity and genuine piety; and I
doubt not he experienced the fulfilment of this promise: "Behold, I have
caused thy iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change
of raiment." (Zech. iii. 4.)


On the 11th of the Twelfth Month they left home, and during the next two
months were closely occupied in visiting various meetings from Yorkshire
to Devonshire.

Their service commenced with an encouraging meeting at Monyash, in
Derbyshire.


13_th_.--The first meeting we attended was at Monyash. It was larger
than we had expected, in consequence of strangers coming in, and proved
rather a lively commencement to our spiritual course of labor.


On the 14th they held a meeting in the Potteries, in a cottage belonging
to one of the few Friends in the place. Word having got abroad that
strangers were expected, many of the neighbors came in, so that the rooms
below-stairs were filled: it was a refreshing time. They found in the
woman to whom the cottage belonged a bright example of piety and charity.


She has been, says J.Y., a cripple from her childhood; but is able to
maintain herself by keeping a school for little children; she is not
unmindful, also, to help her poorer neighbors out of her small earnings.


At Bristol, where they arrived on the 1st of the First Month, 1830, they
rested a few days at H. and M. Hunt's.


We had, says J.Y. much pleasure in being in this family. Bristol is the
largest meeting we have in our Society in England, and to me it was a very
trying one on the First-day morning. I was much cast down after meeting;
but we staid over the Monthly Meeting on Third-day, which afforded me
relief of mind, and I left with as much comfort as I could well desire.


At Plymouth John Yeardley found an object of lively interest in Lady
Rogers' Charity School, established to fit girls for becoming household
servants. He was gratified with the good order, simplicity, and economy,
which pervaded the institution. Martha Yeardley suffered much during their
journey in Devonshire, from the inclemency of the weather; and a heavy
fall of snow on the night of the 17th prevented their leaving Plymouth at
the time intended. In consequence of this, they hired a lodging, and
employed themselves in visiting the Friends from house to house, and in
organising an infant school, which the Friends had long desired to see
established.

On their return from Plymouth they stopped at Sidcot, where they spent
some time at the Friends' school. Here the subject of offering prizes to
children came under the notice of J.Y., and like all other subjects
connected with education, engaged his serious reflection.


It would certainly be better, he says, if the basis of good actions could
be laid in the children's minds on a principle of rectitude and justice,
so that they might be taught to do well from a love of truth, and not from
a fear of punishment or a hope of reward; but so long as human nature
remains unchanged, a check against the one and an incitement to the other
seem to be necessary, as a help to overcome the evil in the mind, until
that which is good shall become predominant.


They returned to Yorkshire through Warwick and Leicester, and on reviewing
the journey John Yeardley has the following reflections:--


2 _mo_. 22.--Almost all the meetings we attended on this journey of
800 miles are very small, except Birmingham and Bristol, and the life of
religion is low among the members in general; which is not much to be
wondered at, when we consider that many of those meetings are constituted
[chiefly] of a few individuals who have had a birthright in the
Society--born members but not new-born Christians, without the power or
form of religion, no outward means to excite them to faith and good works.
If they neglect the spirit of prayer in themselves, it is not surprising
they should grow cold in love and zeal for the noble cause of truth on the
earth. But in the lowest of these [meetings] there is something alive to
visit, and in going along we felt the renewed evidence that we were in our
right allotment in thus going about, endeavoring to strengthen the things
that remain; and though we have had to pass through much suffering, both
outward and inward, yet we have also experienced times of rejoicing in
doing the will of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.


After the Quarterly Meeting in the Third Month they visited each of the
meetings within their own Monthly Meeting, "thinking," says J.Y., "a
little pastoral care was due to our Friends at home, seeing we are often
concerned to go abroad."

In the Fifth Month they went up to the Yearly Meeting, via Lincolnshire,
taking several meetings in the way. Among the subjects which occupied
Friends in their annual conference this year was that of missions to the
heathen, which, it was proposed by some, should he taken up by the
Society.


The subject, writes John Yeardley, was fully entered into, and the
interest was very great. Many Friends spoke their sentiments freely and
feelingly, and the subject was taken on minute to be revived nest year. If
this important matter were brought home to each individual of us, there
would be more missionaries prepared and sent forth to labor; but we love
ease and our homes, contenting ourselves with reading and talking about
what is going forward in the great cause of religion and righteousness in
the earth.


They returned home through the midland counties, visiting most of the
meetings in Oxfordshire, and in the parts adjacent; which they had been
unable to do the previous year in returning from the West.

It was comforting to us, John Yeardley says, to be with Friends in
Oxfordshire, whom we had so long thought of. Many of their meetings are
small; but there are a few individuals among them precious and improving
characters, who, I believe, are under the preparing hand for greater
usefulness in the Lord's church. With these we were often dipped into near
union of spirit, which sometimes caused the divine life to rise among us
to the refreshing of our spirits.


In the Sixth Month they again left home, being minded to see how the
churches fared in the eastern part of Yorkshire. The point which most
interested them in this tour was Scarborough, where they were attracted
both by the town itself and by the little society of Friends. "It felt to
us," says J.Y., "very much like a home. We lodged at Elizabeth Rowntree's,
a sweet resting-place." (7 _mo_. 4.)

At the same time that they reported to their Monthly Meeting the attention
they had paid to this service, they received its sanction to undertake a
journey in Wales.


It is truly humbling to us, writes John Yeardley, in describing this
occasion, thus to have to expose ourselves, poor and weak as we are; but
the cause is not our own, but is in the hands of our great Lord and
Master. May he help us! (7 _mo_. 19.)


They left home on the 7th of the Eighth Month, and spent the 11th at
Coalbrookdale, in the company of Barnard Dickinson and his wife. From
thence Samuel Hughes accompanied them as guide into Wales, and continued
with them a week.


He proved, says J.Y., a most efficient helper in this wild country,
knowing the roads well, and he was kind and attentive to us and our horse.
The stages are long and hilly, and we are often obliged to go many miles
round the mountains to make our way from one place to another. The road to
Pales is over the moors; we scarcely saw a house for miles, except here
and there a little cot, on a plot of ground obtained as a grant to
encourage industry. These little dwellings were generally surrounded by a
few acres of well-cultivated land enclosed from the moor. It is much to be
regretted that the plan of cottage culture is not more generally promoted;
wherever I see it practised I view it with pleasure, as tending to
increase the comforts of the poor.


On the 19th they attended the Half-year's Meeting at Swansea. A Committee
of the Yearly Meeting was present. Elizabeth Dudley was also there, with a
certificate for religious service; and she and John and Martha Yeardley,
finding that the errand on which they were come was the same, resolved to
join company and travel together through South and North Wales. They were
accompanied throughout the journey by Robert and Jane Eaton of Bryn-y-Mor.

As there are very few meetings of Friends in Wales, the chief part of
their service was beyond the limits of the Society. They met with great
openness in many places from the Methodists and other preachers and their
congregations. From the notes which John Yeardley made of their religious
labors in this journey, we select several passages.


9 _mo_. 13. Aberystwith.--Our first object was to inquire for a place
of meeting. We found they were all engaged for that evening, which
detained us here a day longer than we had expected; but this little
detention enabled us to make acquaintance with two of the Independent
preachers, to whom we became much attached in gospel fellowship, A.
Shadrach and his son. The father preaches in Welsh, and the son in
English. It was comforting to us to meet with two such pious,
humble-minded Christians, laboring diligently to forward the cause of
religion. They kindly offered us their chapel for the evening, and after
the meeting they both expressed much satisfaction in having been favored
with such an opportunity.

9 _mo_. 15.--We arrived pretty early at Machynlleth, which is a clean
little town. We did not know but that we might have proceeded on our
journey after having refreshed ourselves and our horses; but, E.D. feeling
much interested for the people of the town, it seemed best to have a
meeting with them. I walked out, and seeing a good meeting-house, inquired
to what persuasion of people it belonged, and found it was an Independent
chapel, and that the minister lived about a mile and a half in the
country.

The prospect of being unable to make the people understand us was
discouraging; for in the streets there was nothing to be heard but Welsh.
However there was no time for reasoning, it being near twelve o'clock, and
all must be arranged by seven in the evening. After some difficulty we
found the preacher, a kind-hearted pious man, who readily granted his
chapel, and undertook to act as interpreter should occasion require. This
was the only place where we adopted the vulgar mode of giving notice by
the town-crier, so common on all occasions in this country; but the time
was short, and many of the people were not able to read our English
notices, which we generally filled up for the purpose.

The meeting was pretty fully attended, and the people were mostly quiet,
considering there were many who could not understand. When E.D. sat down
the minister repeated in substance what she had said; for, not being used
to speak through an interpreter, she declined his giving sentence by
sentence. When he had done, I felt something press on my mind towards the
poorer classes present, who I was sure could not understand English: so I
stepped down from the pulpit, and placing myself by the minister,
requested he would render for me a few sentences as literally as he could.
This he did kindly, and, I believe, faithfully, to the relief of my mind.
He then addressed a few words on his own account to the assembly and
dismissed them. We regretted the want of the native language, as we could
not have the same command over the meeting as would otherwise have been
the case.


At Barmouth, instead of convening the people to hear the word, they had to
exercise a Christian gift of a different kind--the gift of spiritual
judgment.


9 _mo_. 19.--On entering Barmouth we thought of a meeting with the
inhabitants; but on feeling more closely at the subject the way did not
appear clear; there was something which we could neither see nor feel
through. This power of spiritual discrimination is very precious. How
instructive it is to mark our impressions under various circumstances and
at different times!

9 _mo_. 25.--At Ruthin we obtained information respecting the few
individuals at Llangollen who profess with Friends, and set off to pay
them a visit. We arrived at the beautiful vale of Llangollen to dinner,
and alighted at the King's Head Inn, at the foot of the bridge, which
afforded us a fine view of the Dee. There are at present only four or five
persons who meet regularly as Friends. They live scattered in the country,
and are in the humbler walks of life; but we thought them upright-hearted
Christians who had received their religious principles from conviction. We
saw them on First-day morning in the room where they usually meet, and
again in the evening at our inn, and were much comforted in being with
them. The room where they meet is in such [an obscure situation] that we
should never have found it without a guide. We thought it right to procure
them a more convenient room, which we did.

27_th_.--In the evening we had a public meeting in the Independent
Chapel, which was crowded; there is much openness in the minds of the
people to receive the truths of the gospel. Before the assembly separated,
we proposed to them to establish a school for poor children; several
present their conviction of the want of such an institution, and the
minister was so warm, in the cause that he proposed their commencing
without delay.

28_th_.--We went to Wrexham, and had a meeting in the evening. The
notice was short, but the people came punctually, and a precious time it
was. After it was over several bore testimony to the good which had been
extended to them that evening, and were ready to cling to the instruments,
inviting us to have a meeting with them when we came again that way.

This favored time, at the close of our labors among a people whom I much
love, seemed like a crown on our exit from long-to-be-remembered Wales. My
heart was humbled in reverent thankfulness to the Father of all our
mercies, who had graciously preserved us in outward danger, and sustained
us in many an inward conflict.


At Coalbrookdale they bade an affectionate and gospel farewell to the
Friends with whom they had been so closely united in this long journey,
and returned to Burton on the 20th of the Tenth Month.

In the Eleventh Month they made a circuit through Lancashire, taking all
the meetings of Friends in course. They found "several meetings chiefly
composed of such as had joined the Society on the ground of convincement,
mostly in places where no ministering Friend resided." In visiting one of
these small meetings, John Yeardley relates a circumstance in the gospel
labors of his friend Joseph Wood:--


We visited a little newly-settled meeting at Thornton Marsh, near Poulton
in the Fylde. Our worthy friend Joseph Wood had the first meeting of our
Society that was ever held in this part. It is so thinly inhabited that
the Friends wondered at his concern to request a meeting; but one was
appointed for him at an inn, I think a solitary house; a good many poor
people came, and it was a most remarkable time. J.W. said afterwards he
believed there would be a meeting of Friends in that neighborhood, but
perhaps not in his time. It has now been settled about eighteen months.


This journey occupied them about two weeks, and on returning home John
Yeardley makes the following animating remark:--


The retrospect of this journey in connexion with that of Wales afforded a
sweet feeling of peace. We were often low and discouraged, but help was
mercifully extended in the time of need. I often wish I had more faith to
go forth in entire reliance on the Divine Arm of power, for truly in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.


On the conclusion of this engagement followed a month of quiet but
industrious occupation at home.


12 _mo_. 25.--A month has been spent in the quiet, in reading, writing,
and many other things in course. Leisure being afforded, I have spent a
good deal of time in reading diligently and attentively the Holy
Scriptures, I trust to some profit.


After this seasonable pause, John and Martha Yeardley were much occupied
with a projected change in their place of residence, which issued in their
removal, in the spring of 1831, to Scarborough. The motive which induced
them to make choice of this place, and the feelings under which the change
was accomplished, are fully unfolded in the Diary.


We have for some time been on the look-out for a change in our residence.
Inclination would have led us to remain in our own Monthly Meeting, but a
strong impression that it might be right for us to remove for some time to
Scarborough, has remained with us ever since we visited that place in the
Seventh Month, and has always stood in the way of our fixing elsewhere,
although very often have we tried to put it from us. We were so desirous
to settle at C. [near Pontefract], that only five pounds a year in the
rent saved us from taking the step. It was my prayer at the time, and
always has been, that we might be rightly directed, and I had a hope that
if it was not right for us to go to C. something might turn up to prevent
it. And since we could not agree for the house which was offered us in
that place, we concluded to go for a short time to Scarborough, and try
the fleece there, under the belief that we should then be enabled rightly
to determine. This I hope has been the case, for we had not been many
days, I may say hours, in the town, before we were fully convinced it was
the place for us to settle in.


Having made trial of Scarborough, they returned to Burton to arrange for
their removal, which took place on the 7th of the Fifth Month.

We have now seen John Yeardley for many years in the devoted exercise of
his calling of a gospel minister. It is instructive to follow him, as we
are able to do soon after his removal to Scarborough, into his chamber,
and see how, when alone with the gracious Giver, he was wont to regard the
precious gift; how he lamented that he had not used the talent more
diligently; and how his mind was enlarged to see the grace and power which
the Lord is ready to bestow on those who seek and trust him with their
whole heart.


6 _mo_. 8.--The important duty of a gospel minister has this day been
brought closely under my consideration. It is most assuredly the imperious
duty of those who are called to feed the flock, to labor diligently for
the good of others. With respect to myself, I feel greatly ashamed; and it
has occurred to me that should I he cast on a bed of sickness, or
otherwise be deprived of an opportunity of exercising this gift, it would
be an awful consideration, and cause of deep regret, that I had not better
improved the time. The hardness of heart in others, as well as in one's
self, is difficult to penetrate; nothing but the power of divine grace can
reach it, and this requires not only waiting for, but also laboring to
overcome the wandering and unsettled thoughts to which the poor mind is
subject. Merciful Father, give me more confidence in the gift which, thou
hast bestowed on me, and favor me with a greater portion of strength to
minister thy word faithfully. "Who then is that faithful and wise steward
whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their
portion of meat in due season? Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when
he cometh shall find so doing."--(Luke xii. 42, 43.)


Tenderly mindful of the religious wants of those whom they had lately
left, so early as the Seventh Month John and Martha Yeardley revisited the
several congregations in Pontefract Monthly Meeting. They were both
humbled and comforted in the course of this visit.


We were, says J.Y., united in sympathy to many dear friends within the
circle from whence we have removed, and I was strengthened to labor
according to the ability received from day to day.

Since this little journey, he continues, we have been pretty much at home
attending the meetings in course in the neighborhood. We are comfortably
settled in our new abode, which feels to us really a home as to the
outward in every respect; and in a religious sense we entirely believe it
is our right allotment for the present.


In this new halting-place of his earthly pilgrimage, John Yeardley
experienced an increase of freedom, of spirit, and of faith and joy in his
Saviour.


10 _mo_. 7.--For a few days past I have felt my mind raised above the earth
and fixed on heavenly things. I desire that the blessed Saviour may more
and more be the medium through which I may view every object as worthy [or
unworthy] the pursuit of a devoted Christian. I humbly trust this quietude
of mind is in answer to prayer; for I have long supplicated for a renewal
of faith, and that a little spiritual strength might he given me to rise
above the slavish fear of man. My heart was almost sick with doubting; but
on Fourth-day last a bright hope livingly sprang in my soul that I should
yet be favored to attain to greater liberty in the exercise of my gift in
the ministry, if I were faithful in accepting the portion of strength
which is offered. Grant that this may be the case, dearest Saviour!

10 _mo_. 23.--My heart is filled with wonder, love and praise, in
contemplating the goodness of Almighty God to his poor, unworthy
creatures. When we have done all that is required of us, we are
unprofitable servants; but how often we come short of doing this. And yet
so gracious, so good, and so just is our Divine Master, that he suffers
not the least act of obedience to lose its reward, but is continually
encouraging and stimulating us to greater devotedness of heart.


The persuasion which he and Martha Yeardley entertained of the need there
was in the Society for increased means of scriptural instruction, led
them, soon after they removed to Scarborough, to propose the establishment
of a Bible class. The plan was for questions on the Scriptures, to be
given in anonymously in writing by the members, and answers to be returned
in the same way at the next meeting. The scheme was at that time almost,
if not quite, a novelty in the Society, but it was accepted with pleasure
and confidence by the Friends of Scarborough, and the meetings were
maintained for many years. There is an intermission in J.Y.'s diary at
this period, but he makes allusion to the class soon after its
establishment in a letter to his sisters S. and R.S.


Chapel House, 6 mo. 30, 1832.

By way of a relaxation from haymaking this charming morning, I have been
again perusing your affectionate notes, which you were so kind and
thoughtful as to forward us by our dear brother and family. I felt the
deprivation exceedingly of not attending the last Yearly Meeting, but
quite think it may have been all for the best.

But I will proceed at once to the real object of my now addressing you,
which is to say we cannot be satisfied without your paying us a visit this
summer. We think we have much to invite you to. I think you would feel
some interest in our Bible class: it becomes increasingly instructive and
agreeable to all engaged in it. I so highly approve of this mode of
Scripture instruction, that I think the time is not far distant when they
will become more general. We meet once every two weeks when nothing
intervenes to prevent.


The autumn of this year was taken up with a series of public meetings,
mostly in the East Riding, in the greater part of which J. and M.Y. had
the company of Isabel Casson of Hull.

In the Eleventh. Month, at the same time that they returned the minute
which had been granted them, for this service, they laid before their
friends the prospect of more extensive travel in the work of the Gospel
than any they had undertaken before. The time was come for John Yeardley
to pay that debt of Christian love to the benighted inhabitants of Greece
which he had felt to press for years upon his mind; and at the same time
he and Martha Yeardley believed it to be required of them to revisit some
of the places of their former service, and to take up their abode for a
while with companies of persons whom they should find like-minded with
themselves; and also to perform the unaccomplished duty of visiting the
Piedmontese valleys. Considering the extent of country over which they
travelled, the varied nature of their labors, and the large number of
serious-minded and sympathizing persons with whom they were brought into
relation, this journey may perhaps be regarded as the most active and
fruitful period of their lives. We are able, as we have so often been
before, to read their impressions of duty, and their feelings, their
hopes, doubts, and aspirations, in J.Y.'s simple and faithful Diary.


11 _mo_. 7.--Yesterday was our Monthly Meeting at Pickering, and to me a
very memorable one. We stated to our friends the prospect of a visit to
some of the Grecian Islands and the Morea, the Protestant valleys of
Piedmont, and some parts of Germany, Switzerland, and France. It is about
five years since I first received the impression that it would be my
religious duty to stand resigned to a service of the above kind. For the
last nine months it has not been absent from my thoughts for many hours
together. It has cost me not a little to come at resignation; but my
Heavenly Father has been very gracious, and has brought me into a
willingness to do his will. If I know my own heart I have one prevailing
desire, and that is to devote the remainder of my days to his service; and
my prayers are very fervent that he may be pleased to give me faith,
patience, and perseverance to do and to suffer all that his wisdom may
permit to befal me. I am often ready to covenant with him to go where he
may be pleased to send, even to the ends of the world, if he will
strengthen me with his strength, enlighten me with his light, guide me by
his counsel, and prepare me for glory. "If thy presence go not with me,
carry us not up hence."


They left Scarborough in the Second Month, and spent the time which
intervened before the Yearly Meeting in social visits in London and the
neighborhood, in preparing for the journey and studying the modern Greek
language.


Nothing, says J.Y., could exceed the interest which our friends take in
doing all in their power to forward our views with respect to the
important mission before us.--(3 mo. 4.)


A chief desideratum had been to find a Greek who should accompany them as
guide into his native country. "Ever since," says M.Y., in a letter of the
Twelfth Month, 1832, "we have resigned ourselves to this arduous mission,
my dear husband has frequently said, 'If we are to go into Greece, how I
wish we might find some companion for the journey, some _Greek_ to
conduct us into his country, to us altogether strange and unknown!'" A
letter from Stephen Grellet to William Allen, which was sent down to J.
and M. Yeardley, was the opportune means of supplying this want. It spoke
of a Greek girl then at the school at Locle, named Argyri Climi, who was
exceedingly desirous of returning to Greece, and whose simple and
teachable character recommended her at once to their attention. "When,"
continues M.Y., "we came to this part of Stephen Grellet's letter, we were
both deeply moved, believing that thus the way might be prepared before
us."

They communicated their thoughts on this interesting subject to M.A.
Calame, proposing when they visited Locle to take A. Climi as their
companion into Greece. During their sojourn in London they received a
letter from A. Climi, written in French, in which that amiable young
person signified the pleasure and gratitude with which she accepted their
proposal.


Locle. 29th of April, 1833.

Excuse the liberty which I take of writing to testify my great gratitude
for your kind intention to take me with you and bring me back to my
country. How could I have ventured to hope that I should have the
happiness of being with such kind and beloved friends. I cannot express
the joy I felt when Mademoiselle Calame made your proposal known to me.
How great is the mercy of God! How often might he have turned away his
face from me and cast me off; but instead of forsaking me he has looked
upon me in mercy, and shown me that he wills not that sinners should
perish, but that they should have eternal life. Was it not he who saved me
from the hands of the Turks, and brought me to Switzerland, and placed me
with charitable protectors, who are never weary of doing me good? And now
he has crowned it all, by giving you to me as guides and protectors in my
long journey, and that I may settle again in my own country.

Your grateful

ARGYRI CLIMI.[6]


The meeting in London at which their prospect of foreign travel was
ratified, was a time of spiritual favor. With such credentials, and with a
sense of the divine commission and guidance, clear and unmistakable, like
that which John Yeardley enjoyed, many may be ready to exclaim, Who would
not go forth on an errand like this to the ends of the earth! Such may be
reminded, for their consolation, that if the will is laid as an unbroken
offering at the foot of the cross; if all their powers are consecrated to
the Lord, and his Spirit is suffered to penetrate and transform every part
of their being; though a field of labor such as that which was appointed
to John and Martha Yeardley may not be appointed to them, they will, in an
equal degree, inherit the blessing of doing their Lord's will, and may
rest in the promise, "They that wait upon Him shall not want any good
thing."


5 _mo_. 21.--Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders. Third-day morning. Our
visit to the Grecian Islands, &c. claimed the attention of the meeting. It
was a very precious time; a sweet solemnity prevailed; several Friends
said afterwards, they thought they had never known quite so full an
expression of unity and encouragement on any former occasion. What a favor
it is to have the sympathy and concurrence of the church in such important
concerns! My heart's desire and prayers are that we may be preserved
humble and watchful, relying for help and strength on nothing short of our
Divine Master, the holy Head of his own church. Whatever may befal us on
our intended journey, I wish once more to record my firm conviction that
it is the Lord's requiring, and come life, come death, I desire that my
heart and soul may be given up fully to follow Him who laid down his own
precious life for my sake,--a poor unworthy sinner.




CHAPTER XI.


THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, OR THE JOURNEY TO GREECE.

1833-4.

PART I.--THE JOURNEY TO ANCONA.

John and Martha Yeardley left London on the 21st of the Sixth Month, 1833.

Travelling through France they found in the places where they halted more
of simplicity and Christian life than they had expected. In Paris,
especially, they were quickly brought into contact with a number of pious
persons to whom their society and their doctrine were welcome, and they
visited many benevolent institutions conducted on broad Christian
principles. This was in the early part of Louis Philippe's reign, and
under the administration of Guizot. In reading their account of these
institutions, we are painfully reminded how much the rising tide of
religious liberty has been checked and driven back by the bands of
priestcraft and arbitrary power.

Here, and elsewhere during their journey, they wrote letters to members of
the Foreign Committee of the Meeting for Sufferings, descriptive of their
religions labors, from which, after their return, a selection was printed
for the use of Friends. Besides these letters, John Yeardley kept his
usual Diary, which often enables us to add to the narrative, traits of
character and reflections not to be found in their joint epistles.

Amongst the first persons upon whom they called in Paris, were the
Protestant bookseller Risler, and Pastor Grandpierre: the former they
found to be devoted heart and soul to the diffusion of evangelical
religion; the latter they had known on their former journey, and he
received them as his Christian friends. He introduced them to Mademoiselle
Chabot, a lady who spent her time in translating religious and useful
books into French, and had a class of children in the First-day school.
Respecting this lady, they say:--


Our introduction to this precious character was much to our comfort. We
rejoiced together in contemplating the wonderful work which the Lord has
in mercy begun, and is carrying on in this great city. On First-day
afternoons she attends a school, to which the children of the rich go, as
well as the poor, to be instructed in the Scriptures. The young persons in
her class learn texts, and are questioned to see if they thoroughly
understand the subject. On our asking whether the children answered the
questions from what they had learnt by heart, she replied, "No; it would
be of no use, you know, for the dear children to repeat merely by rote; we
want the great truths of the gospel to sink into their hearts."

After this visit, which refreshed our spirits a little, we called on
Madame D'Aublay, sister-in-law to Brissot, who was executed in the time of
Robespierre. She is a Roman Catholic, and thinks the groundwork of true
religion to be in their church, but that their customs and the mass are
nothing worth. We left her some tracts, and amongst them one of Judge
Hale's, which struck her so forcibly on reading it, that she followed us
to our hotel, to say how much it was suited to her state of mind.


6 _mo_. 30.--After our little meeting this morning with the few
friends resident here, and some others, we went to the Protestant Chapel,
in the Rue Taitbout, to hear the children examined in the Scriptures. Many
of the parents were present. The class which we attended was conducted by
Mademoiselle Chabot. The subject was the crucifixion of our Saviour, the
27th chapter of Matthew. The children repeated the portion they had
learnt, and then Mademoiselle C. questioned them in a simple, sweet, and
instructive manner, calculated to impress the great truths of Christianity
on their minds. A gentleman examined a class of boys; and after this
course of exercise was finished, De Pressense gave them a lecture from the
Old Testament. The subject was the healing of Naaman, and the manner of
proceeding was simple; the child called upon stood up and answered pretty
much as they do at Ackworth; he repeated a few verses directly bearing on
the subject, and the application which was made was admirable. We were
really edified in being present. How much this kind of instruction is
wanted for many of our poor children in England! How delightful it is to
see a large room filled with Roman Catholic children and parents, all
receiving Christian instruction together! The Roman Catholics no longer
object to send their children to Protestants, because they know they will
be well instructed. The chapel is a beautiful room, with a circular
gallery supported on pillars, and a dome top; and it is the identical
place where, only two years ago, the Saint Simonians held forth their
doctrines:--


    ...... Oh reformation rare,
    The den of modern infidels is become a house of prayer!


7 _mo_. 2.--We had a long walk to the Rue St. Maur, to meet by
appointment our kind friend De Pressense to visit the schools for mutual
instruction. At this season of the year the children are more busy with
their parents than usual; but in winter there are 200 boys, 200 girls, and
200 children in the infant school, with an evening school for adults.
Scripture extracts are made use of, and also the Scriptures themselves. We
were struck with the quiet and good order of all these schools. I have
seen very few in England where the same stillness is observable. With the
exception of some three or four, all the children are Roman Catholics; and
on First-days, particularly in winter, the room is filled with Roman
Catholic men and women, mostly parents of the children, who come to hear
them examined in the Scriptures and to receive instruction themselves. Our
conductor showed us the boys' gardens. On the walls were grapes hanging in
large bunches, belonging to the master. The boys are so far from stealing
them, that if they find any on the ground, they take them to him. Of the
children who attend at the school, forty-six are provided with bed, board,
and clothing, at a neighboring establishment.


One of the most interesting men with whom J. and M.Y. became acquainted
was Pastor Audebez.


He was, say they, formerly minister at Bordeaux, but received a strong
impression that it was his religious duty to come to Paris. Soon after he
left Bordeaux, a great awakening took place in that neighborhood under the
ministry of his successor, while with himself at Paris all seemed darkness
and discouragement. This induced him to think he had done wrong in
removing, and he was much distressed; but as he persevered in doing what
presented as his duty, his way for usefulness in this great city opened in
a remarkable manner. He first opened the chapel in the Taitbout, and then
one in the Faubourg du Temple, where his labors have been crowned with
success. He told us with great simplicity that he never premeditated or
wrote his sermons, but after reading a portion of Scripture proceeded to
speak from what he felt to impress his mind at the time. He said some of
the ministers considered their discourse before delivering it, and he
believed their mode of preaching was also blessed. Being accustomed to
arrange their thoughts in methodical order, perhaps such might not perform
so well in any other way, and the people were used to it; but he preferred
speaking from a more spontaneous spring of thought, though not so well
arranged as to theological order.

We felt much inclined to hear him for ourselves, and attended in the Rue
St. Maur on First-day evening; and we have this testimony to bear,--that
we heard the _gospel_ preached to the _poor_. He first read the
25th Psalm, and then part of the Epistle to the Romans, which formed the
basis of his exhortation. It reminded me of [what I have read of] the
preaching of the early Christians. My very heart went with his impressive
exhortation to believe in the Lord Jesus as the only means of salvation,
and of the necessity of bringing forth fruits unto holiness.

7 _mo_. 5.--Pastor Grandpierre came to pay us a visit with four of
his missionary students. We had a precious religious opportunity with
them. The Pastor expressed his belief that the power and presence of the
Saviour had been evidently felt among us. The young men were much
tendered; one of them was a grandson of the late Pastor Oberlin, and had
been sensibly affected by what Stephen Grellet had said in a meeting at
his father's place of worship in the Ban de la Roche. Three of the young
men who were in the institution at our last visit to Paris are now in
Africa. We admire the principle on which this establishment is conducted;
the inmates are not sent out unless they believe it to be their duty to
go; if this be not the case at the expiration of their term, they return
home.


On the 7th John Yeardley, accompanied by Joseph Grellet, brother of
Stephen Grellet, visited the Sabbath-school in the Rue St. Maur. Martha
Yeardley was indisposed and unable to leave the house.


When the classes had finished, says J.Y., De Pressense proposed to give a
lecture on a subject from the Old Testament, and bestowed great pains to
make it clear to the infant capacities of the children. I had intimated to
my worthy friend a desire for liberty to express what might arise in my
mind when he had done, which was most readily granted, and after I had
spoken to the children, there seemed great liberty in addressing the
teachers, parents and young persons present. There was much seriousness
the whole time and a precious sense of divine love was over us. Our kind
friend, J. Grellet, interpreted for me in an impressive and clear manner.


The name of Mark Wilks has been for many years identified with the cause
of evangelical religion in Paris. John Yeardley had an interview with him,
and makes an interesting note in his Diary regarding his opinions on the
state of religious parties at this period.


7 _mo_. 9.--This morning I had an interview with Mark Wilks. He
received me very cordially, and, as I expected, I found him full of
religious intelligence; he is just returned from a tour in Switzerland,
and speaks encouragingly of the state of the Christian church in general.
He has resided in Paris fifteen years, and of course seen many changes. He
assured me that the arm of infidelity is weakening; nothing like the same
exertion is made to spread the vile doctrine. The fact is, in some degree,
the people are too indifferent to trouble themselves about it, and would
not spend a son for its promotion; on the other hand, zealous Christians
are doing all in their power to promote the spread of gospel truth.


On the 15th John S. Mollet, who had arrived in Paris after them,
accompanied J. and M.Y. to Madame d'Aublay's.


We met, they say, several of her relations who professed to be Catholics,
but were rather of the philosophical school. They were interested in the
conversation, though nothing of a religious nature occurred. Madame
d'Aublay has distributed many of our books and tracts. The next day she
took us to see more of her friends, much of the same character. We have a
hope that our drawing some of these to the really Christian characters may
do good, since each class expressed surprise to hear us speak to them of
the other. It will be no small satisfaction if any of our Society here
should be like the mortar to bind parties together, and weaken prejudice,
that the one true knowledge may increase.

21_st_--Attended the chapel at the Taitbout this morning. Heard a
discourse by Pastor Grandpierre; he preaches the gospel in its purity,
with much of the right unction. We did not feel out of our place in being
present, and I trust it may have its use both on ourselves and others.
This kind of Christian liberty seems to open our way among the people. In
the evening we had quite a large meeting in our room; several of the
attenders at the Taitbout coming in, together with the Friends in Paris.
It was, adds John Yeardley, a precious tendering time, and I trust
strength was given to preach the gospel; the sick and afflicted were not
forgotten by my M. Y. In supplication.


By "the sick" in the foregoing passage was probably intended Rachel, wife
of Dr. Waterhouse of Liverpool, and daughter of David and Abigail Dockray.
This young Friend, who was ill in the neighborhood of Paris, was about to
be removed to England, but at the very time when the carriage was at the
door she was struck with paralysis. This happened two days before the
meeting just described, and J. and M.Y. had hastened to offer their
sympathy and aid to her afflicted husband and mother. They deferred their
departure from Paris in order to remain with the family, and they both
took turns in assisting to watch, by the bed-side of the sufferer. She
survived only a few days, and expired, in the hope and peace of the
gospel, the day after they quitted the city.

We may conclude the narrative of this interesting visit to Paris with a
short reflection by Martha Yeardley.


I have been renewedly confirmed since being in Paris that our first
religious awakening proceeds from the immediate influence of the Spirit on
the heart of man, and this is the doctrine preached and maintained by the
writings of the truly devoted Christians in this place, who are brought to
profess living faith in our Lord Jesus Christ as the Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and the End.


They found the country on the road to Nancy very agreeable.


29_th, evening_.--The white houses among the trees, and the vines on the
hill-sides, form a picturesque landscape. The reapers were busy in the
harvest fields; and the ground that is cleared of its burdens gives proof
of the diligence of the French farmer; the plougher, if not the sower,
literally overtakes the reaper. In the forepart of the route we saw much
wood and water, hill and dale, with cattle feeding in the peaceful
pastures, which is a lovely sight. As we advanced towards Chalons, it
became less interesting, more flat, with fewer trees and meadows.
Everywhere the harvest more forward than in England, but the crops much
more light and thin.


They entered Nancy under a feeling of gloom, and it was some time before
they could find relief to their minds; but by patiently pursuing the paths
of intercourse which opened before them, they were enabled to deposit with
some serious individuals their accustomed testimony to the simple
spiritual nature of the gospel. In allusion to this trial of their
patience John Yeardley remarks:--


I cannot, I dare not, complain, when I think of the difficulties some of
our Friends had to encounter who travelled on the Continent years ago,
when darkness prevailed to a much greater extent. The want of the
language, &c., which some of them experienced, must have been very trying.
It is to me an unspeakable comfort to be able to understand the language
of the country where we travel.


Travelling by the Diligence being too rapid for Martha Yeardley's state of
health, they hired a carriage and horses to take them to Strasburg, and
found this mode of travelling less expensive, as well as much less
fatiguing, than the public conveyance.


8 _mo_. 5.--Left Nancy at 6 o'clock in the morning, and had a
delightful journey. I feel particularly peaceful in spirit, and a degree
of resignation pervades my heart to be given fully up to do the will of my
Heavenly Father.

Our mode of travelling afforded us an opportunity of calling at
Phalsbourg, where we found a handful of Protestants, about twenty-six
families, mostly German settlers. On inquiring for the minister, we found
he was engaged with his class at the college. His wife appeared surprised
at seeing such strangers, thinking from our dress and our speaking French,
we were no doubt Roman Catholics. We soon perceived the family were
Germans, and I then addressed them in their native tongue, which
immediately, opened the way to their hearts. Nothing would satisfy the
good woman but that we must call at the college to see her husband. He was
embarrassed on being so suddenly called out of the class, and appeared a
little fearful; but when he understood who we were, and our mission, he
became almost overjoyed to see us. There has been a little awakening in
this place, and a desire to obtain the Scriptures. One of them said, "I
have been accustomed to smoke tobacco, but have now left it off, and I
will put the money into the box to save for a Bible." Another said, "I
have been accustomed to take snuff, but I will now save the money for a
Bible." And another said, "I have drunk more wine than I need; I will take
less, and subscribe for a Bible." This little account in such a dark
place was quite cheering; for they are surrounded and oppressed by the
Roman Catholics, in whose presence they are afraid to speak.

On entering Alsace, the view of the country was enchanting. We dined at
Sarrebourg, which appeared at a distance like a town in the midst of a
wood.


At Strasburg they were received in an ingenuous manner by some enlightened
Roman Catholics, who did all in their power to forward their object; but
it was not until they fell in with the Protestant Professor Cuvier, that
they found the proper channel for the work of the gospel. In few places
did they find brighter tokens of inward spiritual religion.


8 _mo_. 6.--Called on Professor Cuvier and delivered the letter which
Mark Wilks had kindly given us. We found the professor an humble-minded
Christian, kind and affectionate. He conducted us to Pastor Majors, who
was born in Prussia, and speaks German and French well. We soon became
united to him in spirit. He is one of the _inward_ school, and a
diligent laborer in the Lord's vineyard. He has been here about three
months as pastor of a little handful of Christians. He is fully sensible
of the necessity of a right preparation of heart before acceptable worship
can be performed. He said when the people came to their place of worship
they were full of the world, and the word preached did not profit, because
it did not sink into their hearts. I believe he fully comprehends the
nature of true silence; and he is acquainted with many _interior_
persons whom we wish to see in Switzerland, &c. This dear man was nine
months in Corfu, preparing to be a missionary there; but he was taken ill,
and suffered much in body and mind. The way in which he mentioned the
wonderful dealings of the Lord with him was to me very instructive. He
told me he had not been sufficiently careful to seek divine counsel before
he undertook the mission; and it had pleased the Almighty to bring him
into the deeps, and instruct him in the school of affliction; and he can
now most fully acknowledge there is no safety but under the guidance of
the Holy Spirit. He and a few others have united for the purpose of
printing and circulating small tracts, purely Scripture extracts. They
are now engaged in forming a selection for every day in the year, from the
Old and New Testament. I accord much with their work; it is just what I
have thought of for a long time.

Pastor Majors conducted us to Professor Ehrmann, a worthy Christian,
simple-hearted and spiritually-minded. His two daughters are precious
young women; the older of them recollected to have seen us at Kornthal,
in 1827. She knew us instantly, and appeared overcome with joy and
surprise, though we could not recollect her. It is no wonder we should
have felt so much attraction to this place, though on entering the town I
was, as usual, extremely discouraged, and I feel unworthy to be employed
in the least service of my holy Redeemer.


On the 7th they dined at the La Combes, a Catholic family, who took them
to see the House of Correction, where John Yeardley interrogated the boys
in the prison school, and afterwards addressed them. In the evening they
were present at Pastor Majors' Bible-class.


It is composed, says J.Y., of ten young men, who meet once a week at his
lodging, and he instructs them in the Scriptures. I rejoiced to meet with
them. Before the conclusion we had a religious opportunity, in which I was
strengthened to express what was on my mind. The pastor offered a prayer
in which our hearts truly united. The Saviour's love was very precious to
our souls, and I trust we were edified together in the Lord.

8_th_.--The Pastor Majors called for us to pay a few visits. He is so
spiritual and _interior_ in his walk with God that it does me good to
be in his company. Passing along the street, he said, We will just speak
to a man who has been in England; he will be pleased to see you. He was
alone in his meal and flour shop, which is apart from the house. He
received us heartily; and on our coming away he pressed us to go up and
speak to his daughters. After hesitating a few moments we went to the room
and to our surprise found a little company of young females met to work
for the missionaries, and to read. After sitting a while with them, one of
the girls in much simplicity handed the Bible to our friend, and he read a
chapter in the First Epistle of Peter, which was followed by a Friends'
meeting with these dear young persons. I felt great openness in addressing
them, and thankfulness filled my heart to the Father of mercies for
having given us this casual opportunity of preaching the gospel.

In the evening we went to meeting with Pastor M.'s flock. He has taken the
first floor of a good house, and appropriates three rooms opening one into
another for a meeting-house, placing his pulpit, which is on wheels, in
the doorway, so that when the meeting hour is over he can put the pulpit
aside and make the rooms his dwelling. The rooms are fitted with long
benches; the men and women sit separate and enter by different doors. The
worship is conducted with much solemnity; they have for the present
discontinued singing. They sat in silence some time at the commencement,
when Majors offered a short prayer, and then read and expounded a small
portion of Scripture. When he had finished he introduced us as English
friends. He had told me previously that if I felt anything to say, I had
only to intimate it to him. This liberty was acceptable to me, for I had
felt much exercise of mind for the people; and after we had rested some
time in silence, I was strengthened to speak with great freedom, and the
power of the Most High was over us. Many thirsty souls were present, who,
I believe, know the value of true silence. The two rooms for the women
were crowded, and the stillness which pervaded was remarkable. A military
man addressed me after the meeting, in English, expressing his great
satisfaction and joy in being present; he is a regular attendant at this
place of worship. The pastor said he was comforted and thankful that the
Spirit of the Lord had been with us, and divided his word to the state of
the people.


On the 9th, Professor Krafft and Pastor Majors conducted them to the
Agricultural School for destitute children at Neuhoff, four miles from the
city. This well-known institution was founded by a man who had been taken
as a child out of the streets, and whose wife had been brought up in an
orphan-house. John Yeardley says:--


The arrangement of the farm-yard, &c., and the cropping of the land are
pretty much the same as at Beuggen, near Basle, and what is now practised
at Lindfield; and it is just what we want Rawden to be--at least what I
should like to see it. Before leaving the premises, we had the children
assembled in the schoolroom, and held a meeting with them, with which we
were well satisfied. There is a sweet spirit of inward piety in the master
and mistress.


On First-day, the 11th, they attended Pastor Majors' meeting in the
morning, and in the afternoon appointed a meeting of their own in the same
place, at which some hundreds were present.


It was a precious tendering season; much openness was felt in preaching
the word, and I trust many hearts were reached by the power of the Holy
Spirit. At 7 o'clock we held our usual meeting in the room at the inn, to
which came many of our friends; and I trust we were again favored with the
presence of the Divine Master. To conclude the evening, we went to
Professor Ehrmann's, where we partook of tea, fruit, wine, &c. It felt to
us a true feast of love.

This has been a day of much exercise; but best help has been near in the
time of need, and I feel sweet peace. There is a great awakening in this
place; thirty of the young women are preciously visited. In accompanying
them home, some of them expressed to me that it had been a blessed and
happy day, they hoped never to be forgotten. These dear lambs are near to
us in gospel love, and I am glad they have such a minister in Pastor M.:
he stands quite alone, not being connected with any other Society.


In reading of days spent like that which has just been described, we see
in a striking manner what was the nature of that work of the ministry for
which John Yeardley was prepared at Barnsley and Bentham by so many deep
baptisms and sharp trials of his faith and obedience. The stage on which
he was called to act was not the most public; the part which he had to
perform was unobtrusive; but when the value of strengthening the weak,
comforting the afflicted, and, above all, skilfully dividing the word of
truth in the anointed ministry of the gospel, comes rightly to be
estimated, it cannot be said but that the fruit was in some sort
commensurate with the power of the call and the extent of the preparation.

The next day and the succeeding were occupied by John and Martha Yeardley
in an excursion to the Ban de la Roche, of which the former gives the
following account in his Diary.


12_th_.--In company with Majors, we set off at 6 o'clock to the Ban
de la Roche. We had a most delightful drive by the side of the river,
flowing along the fertile meadows: the hills on each side variegated with
trees of almost every color, and occasional vineyards added to the
richness of the scene. After travelling twelve leagues, we arrived at
Foudai, where we met with an affectionate and hearty welcome from the
whole family of the Legrands. The two families live together in one house,
with their lovely children. We took tea with them, and then proceeded up
Steinthal to Waldbach, to the house of the late pious Oberlin. Pastor
Raucher's wife and daughter were out when we arrived; but we spent a
little time with the dear old Louise, who is lively in spirit, us to be
near her. The pastor's wife and daughter came home in the evening, and
received us with open arms. We spent the night there, and they accompanied
us the next morning to the Legrands' to breakfast, about a league in
distance. After we had breakfasted, we requested a chapter might be read,
and then had a precious meeting with them. We were so knit together in
spirit, that we could hardly separate from one another. They accompanied
us, on leaving, all the way up the hill, when we again took an
affectionate farewell.

The conversation of our dear friend Majors has been to me truly
instructive, and I trust our being thus thrown together is in divine
wisdom. We have gone very fully into the nature, of our church discipline,
and have had much spiritual conversation to the refreshment of our souls.

We arrived at Strasburg about 7 o'clock, and I attended the class of his
young men, which afforded me once more an opportunity to speak to them of
the things that belong to their eternal peace.


Their religious service in Strasburg finished with a visit to the family
of Professor Ehrmann, in which Martha Yeardley ministered to the company,
and they commended one another in solemn supplication to the safe keeping
of Israel's Shepherd.

Both the German and French languages are spoken in Strasburg. In their
religious communications to those who spoke German, J. and M.Y. sometimes
availed themselves of the interpretation of Pastor Majors, who they found
was never at a loss, and who said, "It is no difficulty for me to
interpret for you, because you say the very things that are in my heart."

From Strasburg they went on to Colmar and Muelhausen. The latter place,
particularly interested them, from the number of persons recently awakened
there, and they held several meetings in the town. John Yeardley says:--


In the whole district of Alsace there is a great deal of spiritual
religion among the different professors; but in some of the ministers
there is great deadness, or else infidelity.


The next halting-place on their route was Basle. This city, and the little
canton of which it is the capital, were then in a state of civil war. The
great political eruption of 1830, by which half Europe had been convulsed,
continued to agitate Switzerland long after it had spent its force
elsewhere. On the 3rd of the month, a little more than two weeks before
the date at which we are arrived, a large body of the citizens, under
arms, went out to reduce the peasants to subjection: the latter gave them
battle amongst the hills and entirely defeated them, killing 200 of their
number. The ferment was gradually subsiding when J. and M.Y. were in the
city.

They found the town pretty quiet, though full of soldiers. A general
sentiment seemed to prevail amongst serious persons, that the judgments of
the Lord were upon the country.


Poor Switzerland, exclaims J.Y., what an awful judgment is come upon thee!
Is it to be wondered at? within the last six months they have persecuted
and banished twenty ministers from the Canton of Basle, simply because
they preached the gospel, and the unbelieving inhabitants could not bear
it.


They visited the Mission-House, and held a large meeting there with the
students and others; Pastor Majors, who was present, from Strasburg,
interpreting for them. "It was," says J.Y., "a season long to be
remembered."

From Basle, they took the Diligence direct to Locle, where they spent two
days with M.A. Calame's large and interesting family. They were introduced
to Argyri Climi, whom they describe as a girl of "pensive character and
genteel manners." On the 26th they descended the slope of the Jura to
Neufchatel.


About 5 o'clock, says John Yeardley, we came in sight of the snow-capped
Alps. I saw them for some time through the trees, but the sun shone so
bright that I did not for a moment imagine they were any other than
clouds; but coming out from the wood I soon discovered my mistake; and a
most majestic, sublime sight, indeed it is.


At Neufchatel they took a lodging a little way out of the town, by the
lake, and remained there a month, receiving and making calls and holding
meetings for worship at the houses of their friends, as Professor
Petavel's, ---- Chatelain's, and in their own rooms. At the close of a day
spent in this manner J.Y. says:--


I feel this evening a degree of sweet peace, and a strong desire to become
more united to my Saviour, who died that we might live. When the mind is
fixed on eternity, how little do all other things appear! Lord, redeem me
from the world, and grant me power to live for thee alone!--(9
_mo_. 1.)


His observations on another similar occasion mark the religious state of
the deeply interesting company in this place, amongst whom they went about
in the liberty of the gospel.


9 _mo_. 24.--In the afternoon had a long walk with our dear friend
Petavel's family, quite to the top of the mountains, from which we had the
most delightful view possible. In the evening we took tea with them; and,
a few others coming in, we had a religious opportunity before parting. It
is extraordinary how great is the desire to hear the word in its
simplicity; they love the simplicity of the gospel, but probably are not
prepared, as yet, to hold silent meetings alone. They all say it is
remarkable we should be sent among them in this time of war in the land
with the message of peace.


The little meeting which had been begun by Auguste Borel had been
discontinued in consequence of his removal into the country. He visited
them, and they found him alive in the truth and full of affection as
before.

Amongst a number of new acquaintances, one of the most interesting was a
Polish Countess. She lodged near them, with her husband and child, and
sent to desire the liberty of calling on them. Martha Yeardley had often
longed to become acquainted with her; and she, as she told them
afterwards, had felt so strongly inclined towards them when she met them
on the promenade that she could not rest without seeking their
acquaintance.


At the time fixed, say J. and M.Y., the Countess came alone, her husband
being unwell, and asked a few questions respecting our views in
travelling. She is a Roman Catholic by profession, but has been brought up
in great ignorance of her religion, and quite in the gaiety of the world.
She deeply lamented the state of her unhappy country, to which a fatality
seemed to attach, and spoke of her own particular trials, having lost four
of her children. Whilst we were endeavoring to make her sensible of the
mercies which are often hid under the most painful dispensations, an
English missionary, who had been engaged in preaching to many of the
Polish refugees in the country, came in with Professor Petavel. They
became much interested for the Countess, and in reply to some of her
questions, the missionary explained the truths of the gospel in a clear
and satisfactory way. We rejoiced in the unexpected meeting; several
others came in, and it proved a memorable visit.

When again alone with the Countess she continued her history, opening her
heart to M.Y. with the greatest confidence. In former years, she said, she
had been drawn to seek the Lord, but for awhile affliction seemed to
harden her heart, and she lost the religious impressions she had received;
but now she felt again a desire to become acquainted with her Saviour, for
she was miserable and felt the need of such a refuge.

22_nd_.--In the afternoon the Count and Countess paid us a visit. He
is a man of strong mind, weary of the disappointing pleasures of the
world, and happily turned to seek comfort in the substantial truths of
religion. The Countess was delighted to find that we were of the same
Society as William Penn, whose name her father much revered. They desired
permission to attend our meeting; and a little before the hour we called
on them, and they accompanied us to Professor Petavel's, where we had a
room quite filled and a good meeting. At the conclusion M.Y. made some
apology to the Countess for the imperfect manner in which the
communication was made; but she replied, "It comes from the heart, and it
goes to the heart." After the meeting none seemed disposed to move, and
the Countess commenced asking questions directing to passages of the
Scriptures, apparently desirous to confirm the practices of the Romish
Church, but sincerely seeking to have the conviction of her own heart
confirmed that they were errors. It is not easy to describe the interest
which this scene presented. An accomplished Roman Catholic lady proposing
questions of the deepest moment, and the learned but pious and humble
Professor Petavel answering them with the Bible in his hand, while a
roomful of attentive hearers were, we trust, reaping deep instruction.
Argyri joined them on the 27th at Neufchatel,[7] and they left that city
the same day for Geneva.

Here they tarried nearly a fortnight, were received with much affection by
their old friends, and had a few religious meetings. Martha Yeardley
says:--


We met with several very interesting persons at Geneva, and had three
religious opportunities with them; at the last meeting the number was much
increased, but the place is not like Neufchatel. The different societies
make bonds for themselves and for one another, so that love and harmony do
not sufficiently prevail amongst them.

Our stay in this place, writes John Yeardley, has been a time of distress
of mind and perplexity of thought, arising probably from the great weight
and importance of the journey before us, and the anxiety of providing a
conveyance through a strange and dark country. After much difficulty, we
have concluded a written contract with an Italian _voiturier_ to take
us to Ancona. May our Divine Keeper, in his infinite mercy, grant us
protection and safety, even in the hands of ungodly men!


The journey to Ancona took them seventeen days; they crossed the Alps by
the Simplon, and traversed Italy through Milan and Bologna. Martha
Yeardley touches upon a few points of the journey in a letter to Elizabeth
Dudley.


Ancona, 11 mo. 4.

We had much to do before we could meet with a suitable conveyance, and at
length trusted ourselves with our Italian coachman, who could not speak
French. For a certain sum he was to give us three places in his coach, and
provide us with food and lodging by the way. The other passenger inside
was an Englishman, who spoke very little French and no Italian, and
another Englishman outside was in the same situation. We could not but
feel ourselves a very helpless company when arriving at the inns, which
were quite of an inferior class, and little or no French spoken. We did
pretty well, however, till we got to Milan, where we rested some days; and
our Englishmen were exchanged for an Italian priest who spoke no French,
and a Swiss who was a little useful to us as far as Bologna; after this
place we travelled five days alone. The inns on this side of Milan are
much worse, and from the detention of our passports in the towns we passed
through, we were often prevented from reaching the place of destination,
and obliged to lodge at villages, where we suffered much in the way of
food and lodging; yet through all we were favored to bear the journey much
better than I expected. My J.Y. was rather poorly for two days, and I was
extremely anxious about him; but the sight of the Gulf of Venice seemed to
help to restore him.

At Sinigaglia, a town eighteen miles from this, they told us that we
should just meet the vessel which was to sail on the 30th. Judge then what
was our disappointment when, on arriving at the inn here, we found that it
was gone.


This disappointment was a severe trial of their patience; but they
consoled themselves with reflecting that "good in some shape might arise
out of the seeming evil."


Ancona, says John Yeardley, is beautifully situated on the side of a high
hill, in appearance at a distance a perfect model of Scarborough. There
are in the place a good many Greeks, one of whom Argyri recognised as we
inquired at his shop the way to the Post-office. On returning she made
herself known to him, and he shows us every attention; he is a fine
looking man, with a countenance as strong as brass. We are comfortably
lodged, with a delightful view of the harbor, but our hearts are in Corfu.

Our young companion, adds M.Y., is amiable and very quick, but not of much
use to us respecting her native tongue, which she retains but very
imperfectly, and is not at all fond of speaking it.

The houses are high, and many of the streets narrow and offensive, for
want of cleanliness and from an immense population; such numbers are
continually in the streets, that there is no quiet or good air in the
town. The darkness is extreme, and the dissipation apparently very great;
the oppression of our spirits at some periods is almost insupportable; and
yet I am at times very sensible of the calming influence of divine love,
with a sense that, having acted to the best of our judgment, we must
resign ourselves to wait for the return of the steam-packet from England.

When on arriving here we found there were no letters, and that probably
they were sent to Corfu, my heart sank within me. We have, however, been
since cheered by receiving a very kind letter from dear Robert Forster;
nothing could have been more in season than this token of remembrance.


Finding no suitable vessel for Corfu, with the assistance of their Greek
friend they hired a lodging, and gave their time to the study of Italian
and the Modern Greek. Religions labor was hardly to be thought of; the
government of the town and every public office was under the direction of
the Roman Catholic priests, of whom there were more than 400. However,
they were enabled to hold improving intercourse with some individuals,
mostly Greeks; "for whom," says Martha Yeardley, "we felt much interest,
and some, I believe, became attached to us; we gave them a few books."

Before commencing with their visit to the Ionian Islands, it will be
interesting to glance at the circle of Friends whom they had left in
England. From the letters which have been preserved, we select the
following extract: the first is from the pen of one who may be described
as sound in heart and understanding, of extensive knowledge and large
Christian charity.


Scarborough, 10 mo. 16, 1833.

MY DEAR FRIENDS.

Accept my grateful acknowledgments, and through me those of all your
friends in this neighborhood, for the copies which I have received of your
interesting journals. It is indeed a cause of rejoicing to us that you
have been so favored in meeting with so many pious persons with, whom you
could hold Christian fellowship, and among whom there is strong reason for
believing your labors have not been in vain. It is to me very gratifying
that you feel and exercise so much Christian freedom in mingling among
persons of various denominations, whom, though owing to education and to
various circumstances, they may differ considerably in opinion on subjects
of minor importance, yet conscious of one common disease--that of sin, and
looking for or experiencing the only remedy--reconciliation with God
through one Saviour,--you can salute as brethren and sisters in the truth,
and feel your spirits refreshed whilst you enjoy the privilege of
refreshing theirs; and like Aquila and Priscilla, with Apollos, are made
the instruments, I trust, of "expounding unto them the way of God more
perfectly." My dear mother thinks that the persons you meet with must be
more spiritually-minded than Christians in this country. They have,
perhaps, from external circumstances, experienced deeper baptisms, and
have made greater sacrifices, than many amongst us have been called upon
to make; and we know that ease and outward prosperity have not been
favorable to the interests of the true Church: but, without doubt, they
are exposed to similar dangers to those in this land whose minds have been
awakened to the importance of religious truth.


After speaking of a journey which he had made with Samuel Tuke and Joseph
Priestman for re-arranging some of the Monthly Meetings in the West
Riding, the writer continues:--


On the journey I received intelligence of the decease of Hannah Whitaker;
the account produced a strong sensation in the minds of Friends generally,
who felt much for our dear afflicted friend Robert Whitaker, and for the
loss which the institution at Ackworth has sustained. I have had a note
from R.W., written evidently under very desponding feelings; yet he knows
where alone consolation is to be sought, and I still cherish the hope that
his valuable services will not be lost to the establishment in which they
have been so long blessed.

We intend to meet as a Bible class on Second-day evening: our number will
be small, but I hope we shall persevere. Your house and garden look much
as usual; but I scarcely like to look at them, since I cannot go to spend
such pleasant evenings as I used to do there. However, I believe you are
in the way of your duty, and I know it would he wrong in me to repine at
the loss of your company.

I trust you do not forget our poor little company in your approaches to
the throne of grace. You are, I believe, the subjects of many prayers: O
that the parties who offer them were more worthy!

Your affectionate friend,

JOHN ROWNTREE.


This letter was endorsed by one from J.R.'s mother (the Elizabeth Rowntree
whom the reader may remember as the hostess of J. and M. Yeardley on their
first visit to Scarborough,) from which we extract a few lines.


The accounts I have received have often helped to cheer my drooping mind,
to hear how many you have met with in various places, who could sit down
with you in worshipping the Father in spirit and in truth. I have thought
of the privileges many of us have had, yet I think many you have met with
may make us ashamed of ourselves; and the desire of my heart has often
been that we may be more deepened.


John Rowntree's letter contained the information that Richard Cockin, of
Doncaster, a Friend universally known and respected in the Society, had
been physically disabled by a stroke of paralysis. R. C. himself wrote at
the same time to John and Martha Yeardley, describing his affliction,
which he received with childlike resignation as a message of love from a
Father's hand.


I have, he says, no expectation of getting again to meeting, and it does
not appear probable I shall be able again to get down stairs. With respect
to the state of my mind, it was an occasion of grateful admiration to me
that such & poor unworthy creature as I felt myself to be, should be so
favored as to have my will entirely subjected, as to become resignedly
willing either to live or die; and, for a time, the prospect of not
continuing long appeared to be most probable. I, however, felt no reliance
upon anything that I had done or could do; my dependence was entirely upon
the unmerited mercy of God through Jesus Christ.




CHAPTER XII.


THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1833-4.

PART II.--GREECE

On the 21st of the Eleventh Month John and Martha Yeardley left Ancona,
and had a safe but suffering voyage of two days to Corfu, the capital of
the island of that name.


The atmosphere in this place, writes J.Y., soon after they landed, is
different from Ancona in every respect. It has to us a feeling of home,
and our minds are clothed with peace and, I trust, gratitude to the Father
of mercies. What we may find to do is yet a secret to us, but He who has
brought us here will in his own time open the way before us.

Isaac Lowndes of the London Missionary Society received us with much
affection and kindness, and his wife and daughter are very desirous to
promote our comfort. They took us to see a furnished house in the town, a
part of which will suit us remarkably well. We think it a providential
thing to have such comfortable quarters to come to.


Some extracts from the Diary and the Journal letters will show in what
kind of service they were engaged during their three months' residence in
this island.


11 _mo_. 24.--I went with J. L. to the First-day school in the village
about a mile from the town. A delightful morning, and a delightful sight
to see about sixty fine Greek children reading the New Testament in the
modern language. Their countenances are lovely and interesting, and their
anxiety to hear and answer questions is great; their aptitude in
comprehending the subjects offered to them exceeds all I have hitherto
seen in any class of children of similar standing. The little group was
composed of nearly all girls, clean and neatly dressed in the costume of
the country.

27_th_.--To-day we received a long visit from Lord Nugent, President
of the Ionian Government, who had heard of our arrival on the island, and
was anxious to see us. He is very kind and extremely open with respect to
his plans for the improvement of the jail, and for cottage cultivation. He
desired me to go and see some unoccupied land without the gate.

28_th_.--According to appointment we went to the palace, and were
received by Lady Nugent with marked simplicity and kindness. We were
introduced to Lord L. and other persons of influence, took tea, and spent
a most agreeable evening, and I hope a profitable; for all our
conversation was on the subject of bettering the condition of the poor and
destitute children.

12 _mo_. 3.--This morning we received a visit from a roomful of
Greeks. We are desirous to cultivate the acquaintance of the Greeks as the
object of our visit of gospel love. Yesterday we were visited by several
of the military officers and their wives, who will I hope co-operate with
our plans of benevolence. Lord Nugent's taking us by the hand opens the
way to all others of rank and standing.

11_th_,--This morning we had a visit from Dapaldas, Greek professor
of theology in the university. He is a pleasing and enlightened man, and
speaks French well, which gave us the opportunity of conversing with him
pretty freely. I feel to love him much. He is one of the laborers in
translating the Old Testament.

13_th_.--To-day we have received letters from England. Many of our
beloved friends have been called from this state of being to another
world. How much my heart feels humbled; how unworthy I am of the least of
the mercies daily received at the hand of a bountiful Creator. Since we
have been here I have been favored with a strong conviction that we are
here in the ordering of Divine Providence. What may in time open before us
in the way of gospel labor I know not. It requires time, caution, and much
perseverance, to find a way to the hearts and best feelings of the Greeks.
I greatly desire that we may be found in humble watchfulness and prayer;
and that, if found worthy to be the feeble instruments of declaring the
way of salvation to the natives of these islands, we may embrace every
opportunity to preach repentance towards God and faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, for this is the great object for which we have left our native
land and all that is dear to us in this world.

26_th_.--Argyri left us and is gone to Syra. She was very sorrowful,
and the parting to us all was painful. Although reserved and timid, she
has become extremely attached to us, and we trust the three months we have
passed together will not soon be forgotten. Her company has often been
sweet and cheering, and in our little meetings for worship her heart has
not unfrequently been tendered with religious feeling. She is desirous of
being useful in schools, and of making a stand against the many
superstitions which prevail, influencing others by her example, and
through the aid of divine grace leading them to that vital religion in
which she was instructed at Locle, and which is now a strength and comfort
to her own mind.

1834. 1 _mo_. 6.--To-day we received a visit from the young Count
Francois Sardina. We had much conversation with him on the subject of the
intercession of saints. He could not admit that they practiced the
adoration of saints, they only meant to hold them up as examples of piety
and virtue, and to induce others to follow them. We pointed out to him the
importance of taking Him for our example who spake as never man spake, and
has left us an example that we should follow his steps. This young man is
very inquisitive and inclined to be sceptical, but under all has serious
impressions. Many of the Greeks who are not entirely built up in their
superstitions are inclined to doubt respecting the truths of Christianity.
We were glad to put into his hand J. J. Gurney's _Evidences_.

23_rd_.--This evening we had another long visit from the Count. We
entered very fully into Church discipline, and left few points of faith
and doctrine untouched, either in his Church or ours. I do not remember
ever to have been more closely questioned; but I think this young person
sincere in his inquiries. I believe it is a precious time of visitation to
his soul; he is very amiable and affectionate, and acknowledges the evils
and vanity of the world.

27_th_.--This evening we have had a long conversation with Pathanes,
our teacher in the language, and a deacon in the Greek Church. He is much
attached to the rites of his own Church, but acknowledges the necessity of
regeneration. They have a fatal error in the ceremony of baptism,
positively asserting that when the child (or individual) has received
this, he is really born again, and a fit heir of salvation. Such is the
efficacy which they attach to this ceremony, that their creed sets forth,
in the most unqualified manner, that whoever receives not the form cannot
enter the kingdom. We could not forbear lifting up our testimony against
the injurious effects of such a creed.

28_th_.--We have had a ride to-day with I. Lowndes and family across
the island, sixteen miles, to the sea on the other side. Our road led us
through a perfect wood of olive-trees, thickly planted and loaded with
fruit. The hills are often variegated with the cypress, &c., and near to
the sea are beautifully romantic. We dined at the fortress of
Paleocastazza, on the top of a high hill, on provisions we took with
us,--the air good, and the prospect delightful. This place was formerly a
convent; the church still remains in use, and we visited two of the old
Greek priests. One of them is ninety-five years old; he was lying on a
dirty hard couch in a miserable apartment; the other performs the liturgy.
I. L. gave him the book of Genesis, which he could read but very
indifferently. He was besides extremely cross, full of complaints of the
soldiers who were stationed there. What a proof that to those who are in
the gall of bitterness there is no peace, even in such a remote place.

2 _mo_. 1.--Another long and pleasant visit from Count Sardina. He is
mild and condescending, but close in argument His mind appears gradually
to become impressed with the truths of the gospel; and I trust the notions
he has received from sceptical writers are giving way to a hope of
salvation through Christ Jesus our Lord. Fearful of doing anything to make
the members of his own Church his enemies, he comes to us by night,--not
for fear of the Jews, but for fear of the Greeks.


9_th_.--How often our hearts are ready to sink within us in the midst
of this dark and superstitious people. We have now been here nearly three
months, and have not had one opportunity of publicly preaching the gospel.
The power of prejudice in favor of their own superstitious rites, and the
overwhelming influence of moral evil, seem entirely to close our way in
this line. We have had much conversation with our friend, Isaac Lowndes,
who has resided on this island thirteen years, on the subject of publicly
preaching the gospel to the people; and he says that such is their
attachment to the ceremonies of their own church that they cannot be
prevailed upon to attend the ministry of any other denomination.
I. Lowndes is a character with whom we feel much Christian unity, and his
family is like a little lamp shining in the midst of gross darkness.

This darkness, adds Martha Yeardley, is increased by the dissipation of
the greater part of the English. The military have great influence here,
and their practices tend greatly to demoralize the unhappy people. We have
just heard that they have obtained leave of the Senate to hold a ball in
the new school-rooms, and to break down the partition-wall between them
for this purpose, which will prevent the school from being opened for
another month.


On the 23rd John Yeardley continues:--


To-day my drooping spirit has been refreshed by six precious letters from
England, expressing the interest of our dear friends in our mission; but
oh, how my heart is humbled in the sense of how little we do. During our
stay here I have been closely engaged in translating Judson's Questions on
Scripture. The correction is nearly finished, and we propose having a
number printed for the school.


Ignorance of the language was a perpetual hindrance in their way. Although
they devoted a very large portion of time to acquiring it, the difficulty
was almost insurmountable. They learned to read and translate; but to
converse in Greek was for a long time almost entirely beyond their power.

Although to preach and teach the gospel was the primary object of John and
Martha Yeardley's errand, the temporal improvement of their fellow-men
was by no means foreign to their mission; and we have often seen that
plans for the promotion of industry and self-support were to the former
objects of peculiar interest. During their residence at Corfu no small
portion of his time was occupied with the establishment of a model farm,
which seems to have been a joint scheme on his part and that of the
administration. A grant of land was obtained from the Senate, and the
prisoners, with some of the poor, were set to work to cultivate it. Some
of the landowners watched the progress of the experiment, with the
intention, if it should be successful, of introducing the plan upon their
estates.

We may conclude this account of their residence in Corfu with some general
remarks on the religious character and condition of the inhabitants.


We trust, say they, our sojourn in Corfu may not have been in vain: if we
may only be permitted to prepare the way for the further enlargement of
the Saviour's kingdom on the earth, we may well be content. Preparing the
way it may truly be called, for there is a great deal to be done among a
people just emerging from barbarism, and bringing with them all the fixed
habits of ignorance and superstition, before a door can be opened for the
direct preaching of the gospel. Their mode of reasoning is strong and
wily, and they ask questions which can only be answered in private
conversation and by Scripture proof. A great means of affording help must
be by educating the rising generation and by the diffusion of Scriptural
knowledge. Many of the priest are extremely ignorant, and some of them
have only learned by _rote_ the service of their own church in the
ancient Greek; their knowledge, therefore, cannot be founded on their own
search for Scriptural truth, seeing they have not had the opportunity of
examining for themselves. In some instances when we have presented to them
the New Testament in the modern language, they have said, with a look of
anxious gratitude, This is what we want; we priests teach in the churches
what we do not ourselves understand.


On the 26th of the Second Month they crossed the sea to Santa Maura,
having a delightful passage of eight hours. Captain McPhail, the governor,
a friend of William Allen's, met them himself with a boat, and conducted
them to his house. He showed them every attention during their short
sojourn, and introduced them to those persons whom they desired to see.
They made an interesting call on the bishop;--


A nice old man, who was many years priest in a village in the mountains,
and, what is a wonder, he has been promoted on account of his virtuous
life. He was a good example in his own village, and a great promoter of
schools. The old man is candid enough to confess that he was happier among
his rustic peasants than he is now in more refined society. We gave him
the book of Genesis in Modern Greek; and it was highly gratifying to us to
see the surprise and pleasure of his countenance on being presented with
an account of the Creation and works of the Almighty in his native tongue.
We thought the opportunity favorable for proposing the Scriptures to be
read by the clergy in the modern instead of the ancient language. He made
no objection, and appeared to see the great utility which might arise from
it.


Something has been said about the semi-barbarism of the Greeks. What our
friends learned respecting crime and violence, whilst in this island,
places the manners of the people in a very strong light.


Nothing can show more strongly the demoralized state of these islands than
the frightful acts of cruelty done to the cattle out of pure revenge. One
shudders to think of the skinning of beasts alive, cutting off the ears of
asses, breaking the legs of horses; yet of these sorts of cruelty not less
than 500 acts have been committed in the last four years, and the
offenders have escaped being brought to conviction!


This dark picture is happily relieved by some traits of moral beauty. The
narrative of a ride into the mountains of Santa Maura, which J.Y. made
under the escort of the governor, proves to how great a degree virtuous
and gentle manners grew and flourished in the remoter parts of this
island.


3 _mo_. 1.--This morning we set out for a ride about nine miles up
the mountains to a village called Caria, which contains about 1200
inhabitants, and in the surrounding hamlets there are about the same
number.

About half-past 9 o'clock we started; Captain McPhail and myself on his
two sure-footed horses, and another English gentleman on a fine mule.
After we had left the newly-made road, we pursued a track perfectly
unequalled in any part where I have travelled; rugged precipices, shelving
rocks, and large loose stones, which assailed the feet of the poor beasts
every step they took. However, for my part, I was well rewarded; it gave
me an opportunity not only of seeing the interior of the island, but also
a specimen of the disposition of the natives. Before we reached the
village, I observed, with some surprise, a tribe of people assembled on
the top of the cliffs to see us come in, and on ascending a few more paces
of rock, we found the children of the boys' school arranged like a little
army, with myrtle branches in their hands to welcome us to their
sequestered hamlet. After greeting us with great respect, they followed us
to the country-house of our English friend.

The mountain multitude waited with patience until we had made our repast,
when a few of the leading villagers were introduced to our room. And what
was their request? A school for their daughters. They were asked what they
would give towards its support. They answered, Whatever we can afford; we
that are able will pay for the poor, and they shall go free. It was then
intimated to them, that their friends would assist them in establishing a
school; but that they themselves must join in the effort, and that it
would be well to consult together, and put down their names and the number
of children they would send. Here the town-crier came forward, and said he
had for the last twenty years cried everything the government wished to be
made known in the town, free of cost, and he would now go round and cry
for the benefit of the school. Next came forward the father of the young
woman proposed for the mistress, who it was proposed should be further
instructed in the village, and then sent to the town to learn the system.
We asked them if they were sensible of the advantages of a school for
girls, of having them brought up to be good wives, capable of managing
their households, and able to read the precious things in the New
Testament. One of them replied, Without instruction what are we?--we are
like the beasts. One peasant had been so anxious for his daughter to learn
to read, that he had made interest to send her to the boys' school. When
we asked why he did so, he said, Because I had no other means, and I
wished to have her read the New Testament to us; now I have the advantage
of hearing that precious book read to me by my own daughter. It was
delightful to witness a feeling like this in a people so uncultivated;
surely the friends of education in Greece have encouragement to go on and
prosper.

After this pleasing interview we proceeded to the boys' school, followed
by as many as could get into the room. When the boys had read, I desired
that questions might be put to them on what they had been reading, but
soon found that this important mode of instruction was neglected; the
master promised to introduce the questions which we are having printed, if
we would send him the books. On returning to our quarters, we found among
the crowd who were still present, the three priests, come, I suppose, to
pay their respects to the governor. We were glad of an opportunity of
conversing with them. On asking their opinion as to a school, one of them
said, in Greek, It is good, blessed and honorable. I could not let this
favorable opportunity pass without impressing on them, through McPhail,
the advantage of reading the Scriptures to the people in the modern tongue
which they could understand, telling them that the book of Genesis was
already printed in Modern Greek. They could hardly believe me, and on my
showing them a new copy of this and of the Psalms, their eyes sparkled
with pleasure. Our friend the governor read aloud a portion of Genesis,
and one of the priests a little out of the Psalms. The long-robed,
patriarchal looking man said, Ah, this is what we want! We priests read in
the churches what we don't understand ourselves, and how can we explain it
to others. They modestly asked if they might have the books for a while;
and when we said they were given to them, there was a little jealousy who
should have them; this we removed by saying that more should be sent. Many
of the kind-hearted people accompanied us to the precipice, and ran before
to clear the way; and, through divine mercy, we reached the dwelling of
our kind host in safety; not without a steeping of mountain rain.

When the good Bishop of Santa Maura heard the result of our interview with
the peasants, he sent one of his most influential priests with a
subscription book for his people to put down their names towards a fund
for the schools, thus promptly giving his sanction to general education.

3 _mo_. 2.--First-day. After breakfast we read a chapter and held our
meeting with Captain McPhail and his wife, and felt a little comfort in
holding up the standard of religious worship. Something was given us to
utter, both in testimony and supplication.

The next evening we dined with the governor. It was a state dinner, given
to the judges and persons of rank in the town; about twenty of us sat
down; the repast was splendid and the dishes innumerable. At the head of
the table was Captain McPhail in full uniform; on his right our hostess in
a rich Greek dress; on his left a young lady in the full Italian style; my
M.Y. and myself were not the least singular in appearance. All was done in
good order, and a sweet feeling prevailed.

4_th_.--We are like prisoners at large, not being able to leave the
island till the steamer returns. Captain McPhail has kindly proposed our
paying a visit to the continent to see a little colony of the natives who
live in wigwams. These people like many others suffered greatly from the
Turks, and took refuge in Santa Maura, which has excited in them a feeling
of gratitude for the protection of their English neighbors.

About 9 o'clock we started in the Captain's boat, a family party, not
leaving even the baby at home. We had a pleasant sail of less than an
hour, and found seven ponies waiting for us at the landing-place. The
ponies were brought into the sea, and we mounted the pack-saddles; some of
our company being carried from the boat on men's backs. Thus arranged we
set out, one by one, along the narrow goat-paths, accompanied by our
retinue, some going before, and some following with the baggage. We
winded our way among bushes of myrtle and mastic till we reached the
willow-city. It consists of about sixty perfect wigwams of one room each,
with no other light but what is admitted by the doorway, four feet high,
with here and there a glimpse that makes its way through the wattles.

The people having received notice of our visit had made a general-holiday,
and were all assembled, with lively good-humor in their countenances, to
greet our arrival. This in the first year that they have been left to
enjoy their lands in peace since the destruction by the Turks of their
little town, which stood at about half an hour's distance. Some of them
possess property in land and cattle, and all live on the produce of their
own farms, and produce their own clothing. These simple-hearted people
show their good sense by avoiding all lawsuits, so common among the
Greeks. They choose one upright old man, with two assistants, to govern
them, to whose judgment they submit, and the greatest punishment is to be
shut up for two or three days in a solitary room in the convent.

The wigwam where we alighted was soon filled with visitors. We were served
with coffee by our hostess,--an interesting woman, with much expression of
mildness in her countenance. After conversing awhile with the villagers,
and satisfying their curiosity as well as we could, I thought it a
suitable time to bring about the primary object of our visit, and inquired
who among them could read. A young man came forward who had been educated
in the school at Santa Maura; we gave him a New Testament, and he read the
greater part of a chapter in the Gospels. Those who were in the room
listened with surprise and attention, and many without looked eagerly in
at the doorway to hear what was going on. This was probably the first time
they had heard the gospel in their own language. We gave them a few copies
of the New Testament and some tracts, for which they hardly knew how to
express their gratitude; and we requested the reader to continue the
practice he had commenced.

When this scene of interest was over we took a turn round the other huts.
They are situated on the side of the hill, among myrtles, and command a
delightful view of the valley. We passed by the common oven, and on
looking in saw our dinner preparing. The table was spread in the
hospitable wigwam which we first entered, a clean white tablecloth and
napkins on a large board, with cushions around on boxes for chairs. The
repast consisted of a whole lamb, well roasted, and two sorts of
Yorkshire-pudding, one of which was particularly good.

This patriarchal repast being finished, we again went forth, and visited
the convent of Plija, distant from the wigwams about ten minutes' walk.
Many of our new friends accompanied us, the judge with great solidity of
manner leading the way. We passed a beautiful fountain at the head of the
glen, and entered the monastic edifice, which is built of stone. The
abbot, a fine old man, met us at the door with a pleasant countenance. He
invited us into his cell; we had to stoop very low to save our heads, and
the door-case was rubbed bright on all sides by the friction of this
solitary inmate passing in and out. The hermitage consists of one room
with a bed in the corner, screened by a slight partition; a lattice-window
admitted a peep into the rich and lovely vale below, and the pure air of
the mountain was not obstructed by glass. I had often heard of the Eastern
custom of sitting cross-legged, but never till now experienced it in
reality. We were desired to sit on cushions spread on the floor for our
reception, and were served with the finest walnuts and honey I ever
tasted; and while we partook of this hermit-like repast, there was a
precious feeling of good, and I believe we had the secret prayers of the
good abbot, as he had ours. When we presented him with the New Testament,
Genesis, and the Psalms, he kissed the books and pressed them to his
bosom, expressing his gratitude for the treasure.

Our next visit was to the habitation of the judge, which is of the same
description as the rest, where we were served again with coffee. What
pleased us was the sweet feeling of quiet which prevailed, of which I
think some of them were sensible; one woman, our first hostess, put her
hand to her heart and said very sweetly, "I love you."

They would not let us depart without showing us their ancient custom of
taking hold of hands and dancing round, singing meanwhile a sort of chant.
Many of them came with us to the water's edge, and prayers were raised in
our hearts for their good, and thanksgiving to our Divine Master for the
comfort and satisfaction of the day.

3 _mo_ 8.--Under the hospitable roof of Captain McPhail we have felt
much at home. His wife said our coming had been a blessing to her; she is
near to us in gospel love. The captain accompanied us in his boat to the
steamer.


From Santa Maura they proceeded to Argostoli, the chief town of
Cephalonia.


We arrived about five o'clock in the morning. The entrance to the town for
a considerable distance is like a perfect lake: the white houses along the
side of the harbor, and the craggy hill with the olives growing out of the
rocks, had a pretty appearance at the break of day. Our young Greek
interpreter, Giovanni Basilik, was with us. We had to call up the
inhabitants of the only inn in the place before we could get shelter. At
first the host refused to receive our little company, but after some
explanation he consented to arrange the desolate-looking rooms into
habitable order.


They visited the schools and the prison, and they received from the
Resident, H.G. Tennyson, and the schoolmaster and mistress, a friendly
reception; but the islanders are generally careless of instruction, and
progress of all kinds is slow.

From Cephalonia they traversed the sea to the beautiful island of Zante.
Though they had ten men to row, the passage occupied thirteen hours.


Contrary wind, writes John Yeardley, compelled us to approach the island
slowly, which gave us an opportunity of viewing the villages and scattered
houses at the foot of the mountain. The town of Zante is very long; the
main street has piazzas on each side for a considerable distance. In many
of the windows (I suppose a Turkish custom) there are something like
cages, through which the women peep without being seen, under the pretence
of modesty; but it is horrid to hear of the wickedness committed in-doors.
However, I am glad to find the custom is dying away, and that the young
women are now permitted to walk in public more than they were a few years
ago. This island is by far the finest we have visited; it is very fertile
and well cultivated, and supplies England with currants; but, like their
neighbors, the people have the character of being immoral, treacherous,
and revengeful. It is sorrowful to think that, under the system of
picture-worship, there is scarcely a sin of which the poor Greek is not
guilty to an enormous extent. With God all things are possible--he can
change the hard heart of man by the power of his Divine Spirit; but,
morally speaking, it must be some great convulsion that can work a real
change in the nation. W.O. Croggon has labored here more than seven years,
and knows not of one conversion among the rich Greeks--not one attends the
service for worship. He is the Methodist missionary here, and is called
the friend of every man: he has been a real friend to us.

The Governor and his wife have paid us marked attention. The former took
us to see the prison, which is well conducted, and the prisoners are
classed. We suggested the benefit likely to result from the prisoners
being employed, and Major Longley [the Governor] intends to introduce
basket-making. We have, in addition to the public schools, visited several
private ones, and are pleased to find so many children receiving
education: this is really the chief source of hope for improving the
morals of the Greeks, and dispersing the gross darkness which surrounds
this people, whose long servitude and sufferings under very hard masters
have almost driven them back to barbarism.

17_th_.--There was a shock of earthquake, more violent than has been
felt for some years in this place. Our room shook almost like a ship at
sea; the walls, beds, tables, and glasses were all in motion, and the
sensation, while it lasted, was that of sea-sickness. The noise may be
compared to the rolling of a carriage with many horses coming at full
speed, and suddenly stopping at the dwelling. (See _Eastern
Customs_, p. 78.)


Having thus explored the four principal islands of the Ionian Archipeligo.
John and Martha Yeardley turned their course towards the Morea.


30_th_.--At 6 o'clock in the morning we put ourselves once more at
the mercy of the waves of the Mediterranean, and had a quick passage of
fourteen hours. The landing at Patras was frightful; a sudden squall threw
us off the shore, and caused us to lose part of the rudder, so that we
were obliged to get into a very small boat, which threatened to upset
every moment. We were, however, favored to land in safety on a projecting
rock: it was nearly dark, and the whole had a terrific appearance.

The plains near Patras, once beautifully planted with currants, olives and
vines, are now perfectly desolate. The castle was in possession, of the
Turks eight years, who made continual sallies from it for provision and
firewood; while, in order to disappoint them, the Greeks themselves
assisted in the destruction of all vegetation; so that there is scarcely
any green thing to be seen. The old town is a scene of ruins; the site of
the new town is near the sea, where temporary shops and houses have been
erected.

It was difficult to find a shelter for the night; but a kind
fellow-traveller assisted us, and at length we were pressed into a
miserable dirty room, with only a board for a bedstead.

At Patras we had abundance of consultation, whether to undertake the
journey to Corinth and Athens by land, or to encounter the gulf. We
concluded to venture on the latter, and contracted with the captain of a
little boat to depart at five the next morning. He deceived us by not
sailing at the time proposed; but we made an agreement with other sailors
to go off in the evening, hoping to get to Corinth the next morning: but,
after tossing all night, we found in the morning the ship had only made
twenty miles; and about mid-day the captain declared he could not get to
Corinth, and must put into a small port on the opposite side of the gulf,
called Galaxidi, and wait for better weather. We were so exhausted as to
feel thankful in the prospect of being once more on land. Nothing can be
more comfortless than these small Greek vessels; in the cabin you can
neither stand nor lie at full length.

After some difficulty in getting on shore, we were led to the khan, a very
large room with a fire in one corner for boiling water, and a wine store;
and round the side were benches which served for sitting by day, and on
which the traveller spreads his mattress for the night, if he has one; if
not, he must go without. We were desired to mount a ladder to a loft like
a corn-floor, badly tiled in, and divided into four parts by boards about
five feet high. The one division of this place assigned to us had no door,
and when the windows were shut, which were of wood, there was no light
what shone through the tiling or was admitted between the boards. The
place was soon furnished, for the boy brought us a mat and spread it on
the floor, which was all we had a right to expect; but as we seemed to be
visitors who could pay pretty well, they brought also a rough wooden table
and three wooden stools.

2_nd_.--Galaxidi is in ruins, presenting only mud cottages and
temporary wooden houses; ships also are in building.

4_th_.--This morning we walked among the huts of the town, and found
an old man keeping school near the ruins of his own school-room, which had
been destroyed by the Turks. It happened to be his dinner-time, and he was
seated cross-legged on a stone, with a footstool before him, enjoying a
few olives and a morsel of bread. Around him stood his ragged pupils,
reading from leaves torn out of old books, some of which were so worn and
dirty that the poor boys could scarcely discover what they had once
contained. The weather was by no means warm, yet we could not wonder at
his choosing the open air for the place of instruction, when we saw his
dwelling, which was a mud hut not quite nine feet square, with no opening
for light but through the doorway. In this hovel he taught his forty
scholars when the inclemency of the weather did not permit their being out
of doors. The grey-headed father was surprised that his humble company had
attracted the notice of strangers; but, seeing the interest we manifested
in his calling, he inquired for a New Testament, which we gladly
furnished, with the addition of some tracts to such of the children as
could read them. This sight was gratifying to us as showing a disposition
to teach and to learn, even under the most disadvantageous circumstances.

Our quarters at the khan became more uncomfortable; the people were so
uncivil they would hardly give us cold water without grumbling. The second
night we witnessed one of the most dreadful storms we ever remember to
have seen. Violent gusts of wind shook our desolate abode, while the rain
poured down in torrents and found entrance in various parts of our
apartment.


They intended, as we have seen, to go to Athens by way of Corinth, and
when they were disappointed of sailing to that city, and thrown upon the
opposite shore of the gulf, they still seem to have supposed it impossible
to reach the capital by any other route.


5_th_.--Being, says John Yeardley, on the contrary side of the gulf,
and thus deprived of helping ourselves by means of horses, we gave up all
hope of reaching Athens, and thought we must of necessity return to
Patras. We therefore inquired for a vessel to take us thither; but never
shall I forget my feelings of horror while trying to contract with a man
for a boat. I said in my heart, O that I might be permitted to try the
fleece once more in turning our faces towards Athens. The man was
exorbitant in his demands, and it was too late to reach Patras without
risking the night on the sea. To stay where we were was next to impossible
without serious injury, especially to my dear Martha. Strong indeed was
our united prayer for direction and help in this time of distress, and
ever-blessed be the name of our adorable Lord who heard and answered our
prayer. Out of the depths of distress a little light sprung up, and we
thought if we could take a boat and cross over to Scala, a little port on
the opposite side of the creek, we might then take mules to [Castri the
ancient] Delphi, and if not able to proceed further on our way, the change
we hoped would be use to M.Y. We did make the effort, and were favored to
get to Scala, where we found only a few scattered mud houses; but on
landing, there was a change of feeling immediately experienced. We were
rescued from ship-builders and sailors, the vilest of the vile, and placed
among a simple country people.

The master of the custom-house, to whom we had a few lines of
recommendation, invited us to his house and gave us coffee. He provided us
with four mules; three for the interpreter and ourselves, and the fourth
for the baggage. It was about eight miles, or two and a half hours' ride,
to Delphi; and no sooner had we begun to feel the mountain air than my
dear M. began to revive. We had to climb precipices where nothing but
mules could have carried us. At the foot of the mountain we came in
company with two camels, which was a new sight to us.

The situation of Delphi is the most beautiful that eyes can behold:
mountains of rock, such as we never before saw, and in the back ground the
far-famed Parnassus, covered with snow. The village consists of about one
hundred cottages, some of them built in the rock. We were conducted to one
of the best of these rustic dwellings, and met with a very friendly
reception from the inmates. The house consisted of two rooms, and we were
offered the use of one of them; they furnished us with mattresses laid
upon a sort of dresser, where we slept much better than for many previous
nights; even the hen and her thirteen chickens under our bed did not
disturb us. The novelty of the visiters soon brought in several of the
neighbors, who did not leave us, even while we took our tea. As there was
a good feeling, we thought it well to improve the opportunity, and
inquired who could read. The master of the house, a sensible man, said
there were only about twenty in the village who know anything of letters,
but that he could both read and write, for his father was a priest.

After tea we produced a New Testament and the book of Genesis, and our
interpreter read aloud the first two chapters of Genesis. Our host had
never seen the Scriptures in his own language, and we think we never
beheld a countenance more full of delight and intelligence than his was
during the reading. After a short explanation of what had been read, and a
word of exhortation, we thought to close; but the company were so pleased
with hearing the account of the creation and fall of man [from the sacred
record itself], that they requested us to read more. I desired them to ask
any questions on the subject they might wish; and the first which our host
put was, What kind of tree it was, the fruit of which Adam was forbidden
to eat? We answered that it was translated in our language _apple_.
He said they thought it was a _fig_. We told them it might be a fig,
or it might be an apple; but that the object of the Almighty was to try
Adam's obedience. They at once agreed to this; and the master of the house
wisely observed, Jesus Christ came to restore to us what was lost by
Adam's transgression. He then said, It would have been better if Adam,
after his transgression, instead of hiding himself, had confessed his sin
to God, and begged his forgiveness. We all agreed that it was a natural
act for man, in his fallen state, to wish to seek excuse, rather than to
confess his sin and repent. We then made some remarks on the prophecy of
the Saviour in the third chapter of Genesis, and ability was given us to
preach the Gospel of life and salvation. All hearts seemed touched, and
our own overflowed with gratitude. We may in truth say, Our Heavenly
Father has plucked our feet out of a horrible pit and out of the miry
clay, and set them upon a rock, and put a new song into our mouth, even
praise to his glorious name. On considering afterwards our situation, we
could not but behold the hand of a gracious Providence which had led us to
this spot; had we attempted to go by Corinth to Athens, we should [as they
afterwards learned] have been stopped by the waters, and have missed
seeing this interesting people; but from hence the way was passable, and
only four days' journey by land.

After dinner we walked through the village up to the rock. We came to a
fountain where several women were washing; one of them, a young-looking
person, suddenly left her companions, and with hasty step and entreating
air advanced towards us, as we supposed to ask something; but she bowed
her head almost to the ground, and then kissed our hands; after which she
withdrew in a cheerful and diffident manner. The reason of this salutation
was, that the young woman had lately been married, and it was customary
for the last bride of the village to kiss the hands of strangers.

The temple of Apollo once occupied nearly half an acre of ground: a great
many of its marble pillars are still to be seen, half buried by the
plough, and corn growing over them. About a hundred yards from this temple
is the cave in the rock from whence the priestess pronounced the oracle.
Among the curiosities of this wonderful place, the tombs in the rocks are
not the least remarkable. They are built of the most beautiful white
marble; the entrance is by a large archway, and round the circle are
several recesses in the stone, one above another, where the dead had
evidently been deposited. They illustrate the history of the maniac
dwelling among the tombs (Mark v. 3.), for these caves formed a perfect
sort of house in which persons might dwell.

8_th_.--We were not able to leave Delphi on account of the high wind
with some rain. In the evening we again enjoyed our Scripture reading on
the hearth. We continued the book of Genesis, and our host inquired
whether those who died before the birth of the Saviour were lost. He was
informed they were saved through faith in the promise. He had supposed
they went into hell, and that when Christ came he released them. We asked
him if Enoch, who walked with God and was translated, could have been sent
to hell. Of this he knew nothing, never having read the Scriptures.

9_th_.--This morning we procured four mules and four men, and
proceeded on our pilgrimage towards Livadia, thirty-three miles from
Delphi. Our kind host recommended us to the special care of one of the
muleteers, who put his hand to his heart, and feelingly accepted the
trust. We were most of the day winding round Parnassus, whose height above
us was tremendous. The road was frightful; over rocks, waters, and swampy
ground; we could hardly have believed it possible to pass through the
places where our mules penetrated. The muleteer performed his trust
faithfully, rendering us all the assistance in his power. On parting we
presented him with some tracts; he could read, and was much gratified with
the gift.

At Livadia we were badly lodged, in a smoky room, and suffered much from
extreme fatigue; but we found ourselves with an interesting family, to
whom we read the Scriptures, seated with them on the floor; and we could
not but feel grateful to our Divine Master, for leading us among those who
were thirsting to receive the Holy Scriptures in a language they could
understand.

10_th_.--We travelled on horses through a comparatively flat country,
despoiled of all its verdure by the ruthless hand of war. The evening was
wet; we reached the once celebrated Thebes in the dark, and were glad to
take shelter in a smoky room, in the first house that could receive us.
The situation is fine, but the present town occupies only the part which
was the fortress of ancient Thebes.

11_th_.--This day we had much mountain country to pass through. Every
tree we could see was either partly burnt or partly cut away. Towards the
end of our day's travel we went through an immense wood, difficult of
passage, on leaving which the Gulf of Aegina appeared in view. We rested
for the night at a little settlement of Albanians near the coast. We
obtained shelter in the cottage of an old woman, who seemed a little
startled at the appearance of strangers, whose language she could not
understand. Concluding, however, that we had the common wants of nature,
and having no bread to offer us, she quickly prepared a little meal, made
a cake, and baked it on the hearth under the ashes. We made signs to be
furnished with a vessel in which we might prepare a little chocolate, our
frequent repast under such circumstances; and, at length, a very rough
homely-looking pitcher was produced; but the greater difficulty was to
find something in which to boil the milk and water. After waiting till
their own soup had been prepared, we obtained the use of the saucepan.
These difficulties overcome, we enjoyed our meal; and offered some to a
Greek woman who had walked beside our mules for the sake of company, on
her dreary journey to Athens; but she refused, with thanks, saying, I am
not sick; for the Greeks seldom take beverage of this sort, except when
they are indisposed. As the inmates of this homely cottage, as well as the
neighbors, who usually come in to see travellers of our uncommon
appearance, did not understand Greek, we were deprived of the opportunity
of reading the Holy Scriptures to them, or of conversing with them on the
subject of religion. All that we could do was to prepare for rest, of
which we stood in great need, having had a very fatiguing ride through the
woods to this place. The room in which we had taken shelter was also to be
our sleeping-place, in common with the old woman and her family and the
Greek traveller; in another part of the room were also a sheep and several
other animals. We swept as clean as we could a space in the neighborhood
of the quiet sheep, and spread what bedding we had upon the mud floor,
surrounding it with our baggage, except our carpet-bags, which served us
for pillows; and after commending ourselves and the household to the
protecting care of the great Shepherd of Israel, we obtained some
refreshing repose. (See _Eastern Customs_, pp. 17-19.)

12_th_.--We started with tired bones. After a pleasant ride of four
hours the Acropolis of Athens burst upon our view. The city is beautifully
situated in a plain bounded by mountains, and near to a rich grove of
olive-trees, which has been spared amid the ravages of war. I felt, says
John Yeardley, low and contemplative; many and various thoughts crowded
into my heart. Every foot we set in Greece, we Bee desolation. I can
scarcely believe that I am in the place where the great Apostle of the
Gentiles desired to know nothing but Christ crucified; and in sight of
Mars Hill, from which the same apostle preached to the Athenians the true
God.

We reached the only inn in the town, much worn by fatigue and bad
accommodation, yet very grateful for having been preserved from any
serious accident during our perilous journey, and under a precious sense
that it was in right ordering we persevered in coming to this place.

We introduced ourselves to the American missionaries, Hill and King, and
met with a hearty reception. The schools under their care are the most
gratifying sight we have seen. J. Hill and his wife have nearly 500
children on their list. We were much pleased with the arrangements of the
schools: the classification is the best I have ever seen, and the children
exhibit intelligence and thirst for instruction. The effect of Scriptural
instruction on the minds of the Greek children is very gratifying. A young
girl whom the directors had taken into the school as an assistant teacher,
entered the family with a mind fortified in the superstitions taught in
her own church, observing scrupulously the feast and fast-days, the making
the sign of the cross before eating, and the kissing of pictures. The
mistress wisely avoided interfering with what the girl considered to be
her religious duties; but after she had attended the Scriptural reading
and the family worship for a short time, the light of divine truth broke
in upon her heart; and as she embraced the substance of the religion of
Jesus Christ, her attachment to the superstitious forms became gradually
weakened, until at length she left them altogether. The mistress one day
said to her, I observe you do not keep the fast-days, nor cross yourself
before eating, nor kiss the pictures. No, replied the child, I am
convinced that making the outward sign of the cross cannot purify the
heart from sin; and as to meat and drink, I read in the Scriptures, that
it is not that which goeth into the mouth that defiles the man.

15_th_.--Visited the schools under the direction of Jonas King, of
the Boston mission. He has an academy for young men, and a school for
mutual instruction, containing together 150. I think the mode of Scripture
lessons particularly efficient. The instruction given in the schools at
Athens seems more complete than in any we have visited during the journey.
J.K. has service in modern Greek three times on First-days, at which some
of the young men attend, along with other Greeks, but not many.

During our stay in this city we visited many Greek families, and
distributed among them religious tracts and portions of the Holy
Scriptures, and exhorted them to the observance of their religious duties,
often calling their attention to those points in which their own practices
are at variance with the doctrine of Holy Scripture.

The ancient ruins are exceedingly grand, and raise mingled feelings in the
heart not easily described, but tending to humble the pride of human
greatness. We saw the Temple of Theseus, the prison of Socrates, the
famous Temple of Minerva; but the spot that most nearly interested us was
Mars Hill, whose rocky mount was in view from lodgings, where we sat and
conversed together of the Apostle Paul preaching the true God; and in the
sweet stillness which covered our spirits, earnestly desired that the pure
Gospel might again be freely preached and received throughout this
interesting but desolated country.

There are not more than sixty really good houses built in the town; but,
including great and small, there may be 1500 dwellings. It is settled that
Athens shall be the seat of the Greek government; and the young king,
Otho, laid the foundation-stone of the new palace in his last visit to
this place.

18_th_.--Being anxious to get to Patras in time to sail by an English
packet to Corfu, we set off for the port. J. Hill met us, to see us embark
in a boat for Kalimichi. The Greek sailors have a superstition against
sailing at any time but in the night; but after being deceived by one
captain, we prevailed, on another to set sail [in the daytime], in the
full hope of reaching Kalimichi the same evening. A favorable gale wafted
us on for some time, but a slight storm coming on, the cowardly captain
ran us into a creek, and kept us tossing all the night in his open boat.
About eight o'clock the next morning we were favored to reach Kalimichi in
safety, where we procured mules and reached Corinth to dinner.

Here there are only a few houses standing in the midst of ruins. We took
up our abode at the only inn, from the windows of which we looked upon the
busy scene of a fair. Our hearts were not enlarged, as the great Apostle's
was; for our spirits were clothed with mourning in contemplating the
darkness of the place. Many persons to whom we spoke could not read; and
on offering a Testament to the man of the inn he refused to receive it.

We pursued our travels, and at mid-day met with a trying detention from
the muleteer having neglected to obtain a permission. We were at length
suffered to proceed, but arrived late at a miserable khan, where we passed
the night in a loft. This poor place could only furnish two mules and a
donkey, with a man to attend them; but we were encouraged to hope we
should find four horses about two hours further on; but here we were
disappointed, and could get no horses to proceed. We felt truly destitute,
and took refuge in a loft from the scorching rays of the sun. We had very
little food with us, and saw no probability of quitting our desolate abode
till the next day at any rate. Thus situated we were endeavoring to be
reconciled to our allotment, when most unexpectedly, about two o'clock, we
espied a small fishing-boat sailing towards Patras, and immediately ran
down to the shore, a considerable distance, to make signals to the
boat-man, and inquire whether he would convey us to Vostizza, a place
within a day's journey of Patras. We directly procured a mule to convey
our baggage to the shore, and descended by a very rough path to a creek
where the boat lay to. Here we were again detained by the guard making
great difficulty in allowing the boatman to take passengers without a
permit, which could only be obtained in the town, so strict and perplexing
are the regulations for travellers under the new government. However,
after detaining us an hour and causing us to lose most of the fair wind,
he suffered the man to take us. We sailed along pretty well for a time,
when the wind suddenly changed, and the boatman told us we could not get
to Vostizza that night, but added they would put us on shore where we
should be within an hour's walk of it, and that we could readily find a
mule to carry our baggage. This we gladly accepted, and were soon landed
and on our way.

Although sick and weary on board, we seemed to receive new strength for
our walk, and arrived at Vostizza at about eight o'clock. Here our
accommodation for the night was much like our former lodging; for this
large town has also been, burned by the enemy, and presents a scene of
ruins. We engaged horses for the next day to convey us to Patras, and were
a little cheered with the prospect of being near that place of attraction.
The man of the house where we lodged could not read, but informed us there
was a school in the town of fifty boys. We saw a person in the next shop
writing, and offered him a Testament, which he very gratefully received,
and sent for the schoolmaster, who seemed much pleased with our offer to
send him books and lessons. We also gave books to several we met with,
who began eagerly to read them aloud, and soon obtained hearers, so that
it became a highly interesting scene: boys who received tracts from us
showed them to others, and numbers crowded about us, even to the lust
moment of our stay. If we had had a thousand books we could have disposed
of them. What a difference between this place and poor Corinth!

Our trying journey through Greece has given us an opportunity of judging
of the state of things, and I hope will enable us to relieve some of their
wants. It is cause of humble thankfulness to the Father of mercies that he
has preserved us in the midst of many dangers, and brought us in safety so
far back on our way with hearts filled with love and praise.


They arrived at Patras on the 22nd, but found that the English steamer had
sailed two days before. They employed the interval before the sailing of
another packet in establishing a girls' school, which was commenced soon
after their departure. At Corfu they received information of the opening
of the school, conveyed in a letter from the sister of the English consul
in the following encouraging terms:--


I am sure you will be gratified to hear that the school which was
established by your benevolent exertions has been opened under the most
favorable auspices. The first day we had twenty-two girls; we have now
forty-eight. Nothing can exceed the eagerness shown by the children to be
admitted, and their parents seem equally anxious to send them; with very
few exceptions they come clean, and on the whole are attentive and well
behaved. Of the forty-eight there are only nine who can read. The little
Corfuot you recommended is first monitor, and of great use.


They reached Corfu on the 12th of the Fifth Month, and were kindly
accommodated at the office of the Commissary Ramsay.


Immediately on our arrival at Corfu, our young friend the Count Sardina
renewed his visits. We saw him almost daily; our conversations were often
truly spiritual; he opened his heart to us, and we rejoiced to believe
that he had attained to a degree of living faith in his Redeemer.


It will be recollected that their inability to collect the inhabitants in
a meeting for worship was a source of discouragement to John and Martha
Yeardley in their former visit to Corfu. Now, on revisiting this island,
they had the satisfaction of holding two meetings for worship with Isaac
Lowndes' congregation.


6 _mo._ 1.--Isaac Lowndes had now obtained leave to hold his meeting
for worship in the large school-room, and I felt at liberty to propose
having an opportunity to address the congregation. This he gladly
accepted, and gave notice of our intention. It was pretty well attended,
but not full; a good feeling prevailed.

15_th_.--We had another meeting with the little company who meet in
the school-room. The room was better filled than on the former occasion:
it was a precious season of divine favor; utterance was given to preach
the word, and I trust there were some into whose hearts it found entrance.

A few days before we left the island, I.L. took us to visit the Jewish
Rabbi, who, though full of argument, appears extremely dark and
bewildered, dwelling on mysterious words whose interpretation is confined
to the rabbinical office. He said they looked for a temporal king, who
should give a temporal kingdom to Israel. It was a truly painful visit,
and we left him with the desire that he might be instructed even out of
his own law, which, if properly understood, would prove as a schoolmaster
to bring him to Christ.


After spending about five weeks at Corfu on this second visit, they again
crossed the Adriatic to Ancona.




CHAPTER XIII.


THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1833-4.

PART III.--THE RETURN FROM GREECE.

Of the numerous letters which John and Martha Yeardley received from
England during this long journey, very few have been preserved. We shall
extract short passages from two which came to their hands not long before
they left the Islands. The first is from John Rowntree, and is dated the
13th of the First Month, 1834.


On my own account, and on behalf of the Friends of our Monthly Meeting, I
feel grateful for the information respecting your proceedings. There is
some difficulty in satisfying the eager anxiety of my friends to know all
that is to be known about your engagements, and I may truly say that the
kind interest which you feel about us is reciprocal. Often do I picture
you to myself, laboring in your Master's cause, receiving as
fellow-partakers of the same grace all whose hearts have been touched
with a sense of his love, who are hoping to experience salvation through
Him alone.

Our reading meetings are pretty well attended this winter. We have been
reading James Backhouse's journal: he was still engaged, when he sent the
last account of his proceedings, in Van Diemen's Land. Like you, he and
his companion rejoice at meeting with those to whom, although not exactly
agreeing with us in some respects, they can give the right hand of
fellowship as laborers under the same Master. Like you, too, they devote
considerable attention to the improvement of schools, and the improvement
of the temporal condition of the poorer classes among whom they labor.


In a letter from William Allen, written the 31st of the Third Month, occur
the following words of encouragement:--


I have heard, through letters to your relations and others, that you have
been much discouraged at not finding a more ready entrance for your gospel
message; but really, considering the darkness; the sensuality, and the
superstition of the people in those parts, we must not calculate upon much
in the beginning. If here and there one or two are awakened and
enlightened, they may be like seed sown, and in the Divine Hand become
instruments for the gathering of others. Should you be made the means of
accomplishing this, in only a very few instances, it will be worth all
your trials and sufferings. And again, you must consider that, in the
performance of your duty, seed may be sown even _unknown by you_,
which may take root, and grow, and bring forth fruit to the praise of the
Great Husbandman, though you may never hear of it. Be encouraged
therefore, dear friends, to go on from day to day in simple reliance on
your Divine Master, without undue anxiety for consequences; for depend
upon it, when he has no more work for you to do, he will make you sensible
of a release.


The passage to Ancona was tedious.


We embarked at noon, and had a long passage to Ancona of twelve days. We
landed on the 29th, and soon found ourselves occupying an empty room in
the Lazaretto, without even the accommodation of a shelf or closet. The
term of quarantine is fourteen days, but four days are remitted by the
Pope. The heat is oppressive, and the mosquitoes annoy us much, but we are
preserved in a tolerable degree of health; and in taking a review of our
visit to Greece and the Ionian Islands, we are still sensible of a very
peaceful feeling, under a belief that we have followed the pointings of
the Great Master, and a hope that the day is not far distant when the way
will be more fully opened in those countries to receive the gospel. The
preaching of John in the wilderness has often appeared to us to be
applicable to this people,--Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

7 _mo._ 6.--We left Ancona, and took the route through Foligno and
Arezzo to Florence. That part of the Pope's dominions through which we
have passed is highly picturesque; hill and dale continually, and the
whole country cultivated absolutely like a garden. Most of the towns are
on the hills, and nothing can exceed the beauty of their situation. But as
to vital religion, the spirit of those who desire the promotion of the
Redeemer's kingdom, on the broad and sound basis of common Christianity,
must be clothed with mourning in passing through this superstitious and
illiberal country. What we have seen of Tuscany is not so fine, but the
appearance of the peasants is much superior. The inns are much more
agreeable than we found them on the road from Geneva to Ancona.

We arrived at Florence on the 10th. The persons to whom we had
recommendations were absent, on account of the heat of the season, except
the Abbot Valiani, a spiritually-minded man, who showed us great kindness.
He has refused many advantageous offers of promotion, choosing to be
content with a little, rather than to be hampered with fetters which I
believe he thinks unscriptural, and not for the good of the Church; he is
of the opinion that it would be better for the common people to have the
Bible, and to be more acquainted with its contents. He conducted us to see
the School for Mutual Instruction, founded under the patronage of the
Grand Duke, about twelve years ago. The school-room is very large, airy,
and well lighted; it was formerly a convent. The system of education
differs a little from that practiced in England; but the children, about
240 in number, are apparently under an efficient course of instruction and
discipline. The younger boys have a string put round the neck, which
confines them to the place during the lesson, but I observed it did not
confine their attention. We were much pleased with the countenance and
manners of the director, the Abbot Luigi Brocciolini; his heart appears to
be in his work, which is by no means easy.

We left Florence early on the 13th, and had four days' hard travelling to
Genoa. From Sestri to Genoa, a day's journey, is by the sea, and under the
mountains, some of them of a tremendous height, and beautifully covered
with olives, vines, and figs: the houses hang quite on the sides of the
mountains amidst the olives; I do not remember to have passed through any
country equally picturesque.

We had packed as many books and tracts as we well could in our wardrobe
trunks, which were not once opened at the different custom-houses, but the
surplus tracts, &c., we were obliged to put into a spare box by
themselves, and this box was not suffered to pass the frontier of
Sardinia. The first officer was embarrassed, not knowing how to act, and
sent a gendarme with us to the bureau of Sarzana, the next town. The
officer there was remarkably civil, but told us the law is such that books
cannot enter except on conditions to which we could not in our conscience
submit. We therefore left them in the bureau, desiring that they might be
made useful: a person in the office said, in a half-whisper, These are the
books to turn the people's heads. We were glad this loss did not prevent
us from distributing others out of our remaining store, at the inns, and
pretty freely on the road.


Their object in returning by Genoa was to visit the valleys of Piedmont.
They reached Turin on the 19th, and proceeded on the 22nd to Pignerol.
From this place they visited most of the valleys, went into all the
families where Stephen Grellet had been, and had frequent religious
conversation with the pastors and some of the people.


We spent, says J.Y., five days amongst them. The old pastor Best died soon
after the time that Stephen Grellet was there. We met his son, lately
appointed chaplain to the Protestant congregation at Turin. He is a young
man of talent, lively and intelligent, and desirous of being useful in his
new sphere of action. He came to us often at our little inn, and made many
inquiries as to the nature of our religious principles; our conversation
mostly turned on the necessity of the assistance of the Holy Spirit in the
exercise of Christian ministry. This he fully admitted, but was not
prepared to dispense with the necessity of an academical preparation. I
fear that sending the young men to Geneva for this purpose has not always
had a salutary effect.

We thought it right to attend their worship on First-day morning at La
Tour. The congregation consisted of about 900 clean and well-dressed
peasants, many of whose countenances looked serious. The short discourse
of Pastor Peyron was orthodox, and the application impressive and edifying.
He afterwards dined and spent the afternoon with us at the widow Best's,
with several branches of her interesting and pious family. I humbly trust
this day was spent to mutual comfort.


They were disappointed to find that strangers were forbidden by law to
hold public meetings, or preach in the assemblies of the Protestants; and
although they met with many pious individuals, they thought the life of
religion on the whole at a low ebb, and deplored the prevalence of the
forms and ceremonies used by the Church, of England. The schools, too,
they found to be in a very poor state; the masters deficient in education
and badly paid, and the schools conducted without system. The ministers
showed them great kindness, and on their quitting La Tour, Pastor Best
encouraged them by the expression of satisfaction with their visit. They
returned to Turin on the 28th.

Passing over Mont Cenis, they directed their course to Geneva, where they
arrived on the 3rd of the Eighth Month, rejoiced to be once more on the
English side of the Alps. On their outward journey their sojourn in this
city had been short, but now they found it needful to make a longer visit,
and were thankful in being permitted to mingle again in intimate communion
with those who understood the language of the Spirit. They paid and
received many visits, and held two religious meetings at their hotel, at
the latter of which about fifty persons were present.

One of the most interesting occasions of which they speak was a Missionary
Meeting, in which the minister Olivier unfolded his experience of a divine
call to leave his country, and go abroad on the service of the gospel. The
voice which he described as having been sounded in his spiritual ear, and
the manner in which he received it, must have struck John Yeardley as
singularly in accordance with the call to a similar service which he
himself had heard so distinctly in his younger days, and which, like
Olivier, he had for a long time hidden in his heart.


8 _mo_. 4.--In the evening I attended the Missionary Meeting in the
Chapel de l'Oratoire. Pastor Merle [d'Aubigne] opened the meeting by a
short prayer, and singing, and then gave a narrative of the liberation of
the slaves in the English colonies, according to the account received from
England. Pastor Olivier, from Lausanne, was present. He is about to depart
for Lower Canada, and he spoke in a very touching manner of the way in
which the mission had first opened on his own mind. When the concern was
made known in his heart, he kept it there in secret prayer to the Lord for
direction, and whenever he heard what he believed to be the same voice, it
was always--Go, and the Lord will go with thee. A real unction attended
while he gave us this account; the way in which he spoke of it resembled
the manner of one of our Friends laying a concern before a meeting: many
hearts present felt the force of his words. His exhortation to the young
persons was excellent. Pastor Gaussen concluded the meeting with an
address and lively prayer.


Among the friends with whom they had religious intercourse were Pastors
L'Huillier, Gallon, and Molinier. The last was a "father in the church" to
them. After some conversation on the state of religion in Geneva, he
proposed their sitting awhile in silence, well knowing the practice of the
Society of Friends in this respect. John and Martha Yeardley had each a
gospel message to deliver to him, after which he took them both by the
hand, and offered up prayer for their preservation and the prosperity of
the Society to which they belonged. "It was," says J.Y., "the effusion of
the Holy Spirit, accompanied with power, and refreshed our spirits."

With Pastor Gallon John Yeardley had a long conversation on the principles
and operations of the Societe Evangelique.


I find them, he says, more liberal in their views than had been
represented, and their extent of usefulness is already considerable. In
their Academy they instruct young men with a view to their becoming
ministers, missionaries, school-masters, &c., as the prospect for their
future usefulness may open under the direction of Divine Providence. In a
place like Geneva, such an institution may be well: while we regard it
with some caution lest it should run too high on points of doctrine, we
cannot but hail with peculiar satisfaction such a favorable opportunity of
educating young men in the sound principles of Christianity, that they may
happily prove instruments in the Divine Hand to check the spread of
infidelity.


From Geneva they went to Lausanne. Their old friend, Professor Gaudin,
took them to see several pastors, and other pious persons, and on
First-day, the 17th, he and his family, with some other serious-minded
individuals, joined them in their hour of worship at the inn.


It was, says J.Y., a time of a little encouragement to our tried minds,
for we had been brought into doubt as to the utility of resting here,
although we had seen, as we believed, in the true light, that we ought to
seek out a few who could unite with us in our simple way.


On the 18th they went on to Neufchatel, where they were received as before
with much affection, and where they proposed to settle down for the
winter, after making a tour in some neighboring parts of Switzerland.

On the 20th they went to Berne, and hired a lodging, for the purpose of
devoting themselves to religious intercourse with persons of the
_interior_ class. As soon as it was known they had arrived, their
acquaintance rapidly increased, and they found it difficult to receive all
who came. One of their first acts was to renew their intercourse with the
Combe family at Wabern, where their visit in 1828 had left a sweet
remembrance.

They spent a fortnight in Berne and the neighborhood, and some passages
from John Yeardley's account of this interesting visit may properly find a
place here. The continual flow of Christian sympathy which it was now
their happiness to experience, formed a strong contrast to the dreary
spiritual wastes they had traversed in Italy and Greece. It was at this
time that they contracted or renewed a friendship with Sophie
Wuerstemberger, since well known to many other English Friends.


8 _mo_. 24.--How greatly I feel humbled under the prospect before us
in this place; many thirsting souls are looking to us for help, and we
feel poor and weak; we can only direct them to Him from whom all strength
comes. O my Saviour, forsake us not in this trying hour; give us the
consolation of thy Holy Spirit, and a portion of strength to do thy will!
Our meeting is appointed for this evening; enlighten our understanding, O
Lord, that we may be enabled to instruct the people in the right way.

25_th_.--More came to the meeting last evening than we expected. They
were still, and a good feeling prevailed; there were those present who
knew something of inward retirement with their Saviour.

Madame Combe called yesterday to ask some questions on the Supper and
Baptism. I believe it would be an advantage to these pious people, if they
were to read and compare one part of the Scripture with another more
diligently. She left us well satisfied with the explanation given to her
questions. We never touch on these points, unless we are asked questions
upon them.

The various visits received this day have closed with one of no common
interest from Dr. Karl Bouterwek, a young man from Prussia. He told as he
had received much benefit in the church of the Dissidents, but was on the
point of separating from them, because he could not agree in acknowledging
they were the _only true_ visible church. After some observations on
the Supper, &c., we observed that there were individuals in this place
whom the Most High was calling into more spirituality and purity of
worship. He asked why we thought so. Our reasons were given, and he made
no reply; but a most solemn and precious silence came over us, which it
was beyond our power to break by uttering words. Our hearts were filled
with love, and the dear young man went away to avoid showing the feelings
of his heart by the shedding of tears.

28_th_.--Took tea at the Pavilion, a pleasant country walk of twenty
minutes from town, with Mad'e de Watteville and her daughter. She had
invited a number of friends to meet us. We passed a couple of hours,
pleasantly conversing, mostly on religious subjects. It is a little
extraordinary, with what openness some of these dear people speak to us of
the state of their minds. When the circle was seated, we formed a pretty
large company. The daughter of Mad'e de W. whispered to my M.Y., Are we
too dissipated to have something good? We told her it was always good to
endeavor to retire before the Lord in humility of soul. I trust a parting
blessing was felt amongst us.

30_th_.--From 9 o'clock till half-past 12, we received visits in
succession, I think not fewer than fifteen. At half-past 2, Mad'e de Tavel
accompanied us to the Penitentiary prison. For cleanliness and order, I
think, it exceeds all I ever saw of the kind. I fear the religious
instruction is very superficial; none but formal prayers and written
sermons are used.

31_st_.--Attended Mad'lle Berthom's Scripture class, at the
Institution for the Destitute. There are eighteen girls in the house to
bed and hoard; it has been established about six years. M.B.'s method of
examining the children is the most simple and spiritual of any that I have
seen; she has an extraordinary gift for the purpose.

9 _mo_. 2.--Attended the Monthly Meeting in the missionary room. Many
of the company were peasants from some distance. The singing excepted, it
resembled a Monthly Meeting for worship in our Society; for all had
liberty to speak one after the other, five or six speaking by way of
testimony: the doctrine was sound, and the way in which they coupled this
with their Christian experience was really excellent. I had much unity
with the concluding prayer by Pastor Merley.

2_nd_.--The evening was spent at Mad'e W.'s, with a pretty large
company. ---- proposed for a few verses to be sung; afterwards he read a
chapter, and gave a long exposition, somewhat dry. When this and a prayer
were gone through, it was late; neither my M.Y., nor myself, were able to
express what was on our minds. Some uneasiness and disappointment were
expressed by several; and two of these dear friends came to our lodgings
the next day, with whom we had a precious time. My M.Y. had to speak a few
words to the particular state of M.B., and at the close she acknowledged,
in brokenness of spirit, that it was the truth.

There is a remarkable awakening in the town and canton of Berne, both
among those of the higher walks of life and the peasants; but there is not
strength enough to come out of the forms. There are thirty females to one
man among those who are lately become serious.


From Berne, J. and M.Y. proceeded to Zurich, arriving there on the 5th of
the Ninth Month. They spent three days in the city, chiefly in the company
of the Gessner-Lavater family, and renewed with the various members of it
the intimate friendship of former years. A short passage descriptive of
this sojourn is hero appended.


9 _mo_. 7.--We attended the worship of the National Church, and heard
the pious Gessner. What he said was excellent, but I never enter these
places without feeling regret that good Christians can be so bound by
book-worship; it certainly damps the life of religion in the assemblies.
How much we ought to rejoice in being delivered from the forms.

I was instructed yesterday evening by hearing a reply of one of the first
missionaries of the Moravians [?]. He had labored diligently for
twenty-five years, and when asked how many souls had been turned to the
Lord by his means, he modestly answered, Seven. The person expressing
surprise at the smallness of the number in so many years, he replied, How
happy shall I be to stand in the Lord's presence at the last day, and to
say, Lord, here am I and the seven children whom thou hast given me. We
ought to labor in faith, and not expect to see fruit.


The next town where they halted was Schaffhausen, like Zurich, dear to
them in the recollections of past visits. Here they examined the school
for poor children in the town, and that of Buch in the neighborhood. They
were delighted with both these institutions. The mistress of the former
possessed an extraordinary natural talent for her office; she was
originally a servant, when, instead of seeking her own pleasure on the
First-days of the week, as other servants did, she would take a few
children to teach them to read and instruct them in the Bible. Their visit
to the school at Buch is described by John Yeardley in No. 10 of his
Series of Tracts, _The Six Secrets_.

On the 13th they went to Basle, where they conversed with most of the
pastors, and several other individuals of religious character.


Serious, retired persons, says John Yeardley (9 mo. 21), frequently come
to us and open the state of their minds with great freedom and confidence.
If we are of any use to their thirsty souls, it is the Saviour's love that
draws us into sympathy with them, and his good Spirit that enables us to
speak a word in season to their condition.


As usual, they visited the Mission House. Inspector Blumhardt informed
them that the translation which had been made of J.J. Gurney's "Essays on
Christianity," and of which 2000 copies were printed, had been productive
of great good; they had been distributed chiefly among those who were
connected with the German universities.

They remained at Basle until the 1st of the Tenth Month, and then returned
by way of Berne to Neufchatel. At Berne a sudden diversion was given to
the current of their thoughts by the intelligence of the death of Thomas
Yeardley. J.Y. has left a memorandum of the occurrence, and of the
singular foreshadowing of it upon his own mind which took place at Zurich.


10 _mo_. 2. _Berne_.--We found many letters from England waiting
for us here, one of which, from my nephew John Yeardley, brought the
sorrowful intelligence of the sudden and unexpected removal of my
dearly-beloved brother Thomas, of Ecclesfield Mill. This took place on the
6th of the Ninth Month, about 20 minutes past 2, without sigh or groan,
even as a lamb. These are the expressions of J.Y.; he adds several sweet
expressions of my precious brother's, which show that the solemn change to
him was a joyful one: and I do believe his tribulated spirit is now at
rest. On recurring to the 6th ultimo to see where we were, and what were
the contemplations of my mind, I find we were at Zurich. That morning the
following lines which I heard when a child, and had not repeated for the
last twenty years, came forcibly into my mind:--


    It's almost done, it's almost o'er,
    We're joining them that are gone before;
    We soon shall meet upon that shore
    Where we shall meet to part no more.


I not only repeated them to myself the whole of the day, but even sung
them aloud so often that my dear M.Y. said to me, "Whatever can be the
meaning that thou so often repeats these lines?" I replied, "I do not know
that I have repeated them for the last twenty years, but to-day they are
continually with me." This can have been nothing but the spirit of
sympathy with the soul of my dear departing brother, for the awful
impression of sorrow and solemnity in my mind on that day will never be
forgotten; I mourned with the bereaved family without knowing it. My M.Y.
had opened her portfolio to begin a letter to our sister Rachel, and I
wrote the verse on a piece of loose paper, and she slipped it into her
papers, and said to herself, Surely these lines are not prophetic of
something that is going to happen? Last evening she banded me out of her
portfolio the piece of paper containing the lines.


At Berne they received also the tidings that "the excellent" M.A. Calame
was no more; the Christian mother of 250 orphan children was taken from
the scene of her labors and the conflicts of time to the heavenly rest in
her Saviour. The following appear to be among the last words which she
wrote; they were no doubt addressed to her faithful companion Zimmerlin:--


In my numerous shortcomings I have enough constantly to humble me, and
without being surprised at it, since evil is my heritage; but my help is
in the Lord, who delights in mercy. I have hope also for all my brethren
whom I love, whatever name they hear. There are twelve gates by which to
enter into the Holy City, and if they have passed through the great gate,
which is Christ, I am sure that those who enter from the east, as well as
those who have been brought in by the west, will be there; but those who
enter with me are better known to me than the rest whom I shall meet in
that celestial Jerusalem, whither my sighs daily carry me, yet in
submission to the heavenly decrees, desiring only that the will of God our
Saviour be done.

You think my task is light? Ah, no! the love which the Lord has given me
spends itself on so many hearts closed to their true interests; I see the
hand of the enemy in their souls; I am so often deceived in my hopes, that
my work is watered by my tears. From time to time, however, the Lord gives
me hope; a soul awakes from sleep, and is kindled into light by the torch
of the gospel.

And now, dear sister, have no longer any esteem or consideration for me;
only let the love of Christ live in thy heart for me: the desires of my
heart carry you with it to the feet of Him who is Love.


When they returned home, John and Martha Yeardley printed a short memoir
of this extraordinary woman, whose name, though comparatively little known
upon earth, is doubtless enshrined in the hearts of many who still
survive, and shall one day shine with a lustre which the most brilliant of
her sex, whose ambition it is to adorn the court, the concert or the
drawing-room, will desire in vain to wear.

At Berne J. and M.Y. commenced a Bible class, similar in kind to the
Scarborough reunion, which was continued until their departure, and was
the source of much pleasure and profit to those who attended. Before
quitting Berne, thinking it might perhaps be the last opportunity they
should have of meeting with their numerous and beloved friends in that
city, they invited them to join them in worship in their apartment.


Many, says John Yeardley, gave us their company; much tenderness of spirit
was felt, and through the mercy of Divine Love many present were, I trust,
comforted and refreshed.

We quitted Berne on the 30th. We had become so affectionately attached to
many Christian friends, that parting from them was severely felt. But what
happiness Christians enjoy even in this world I those who love the Saviour
remain united in Him when outwardly separated.


Neufchatel, for the sake of those who resided there, was equally
attractive to them as Berne.


We arrived at Neufchfatel, writes John Yeardley, on Fifth-day, and on
Seventh-day (11 mo. 1) settled into a comfortable lodging on the border of
the lake. It feels to us the most like home of any residence we have had
during our pilgrimage in foreign lands. Our suite of cottage-rooms runs
alongside the water, with a gallery in front, and the little boats on the
lake, and the mountains in the distance, covered with snow, are objects
pleasing to the eye. What gives us the most satisfaction is the feeling of
being in our right place, and to meet with such a warm reception from our
dear friends.


This feeling was succeeded by some religious service of an interesting
character, in reviewing which John Yeardley says:--


23_rd_.--Among those who meet with us, a little few know how to
appreciate true silence, others are not come to this. But for what purpose
are we here? If it may please our Heavenly Father to make use of us as
feeble instruments of drawing a single individual into nearer communion
with the Beloved of souls, we ought to be content; and, blessed be his
Holy Name, his presence is often felt in our hearts.


As has been already said, they looked forward to spending the winter at
Neufchatel. This intention, and their ulterior project of visiting Germany
in the spring, were frustrated by the alarming illness of Adey Bellamy
Savory, Martha Yeardley's only brother, the news of which reached them on
the 29th of the Eleventh Month.


This day's post, writes John Yeardley, brought us the sorrowful news of
the severe illness of our dear brother A.B. Savory. The family at
Stamford-hill have expressed a strong desire for us to return, if we could
feel easy so to do, and seeing that we have pretty much got through what
we had in prospect in Switzerland, we are, on the whole, most comfortable
to go direct for London, and leave Germany for the present. Our great
Master is very gracious to us, giving us to feel sweet peace in the
termination of our labors, and to look forward with hope to seeing our
native land once more.


The next day was First-day; the parting with their Neufchatel friends was
very affecting.


11 _mo_. 30.--A precious meeting this morning. The presence of Him
who died for us was near, to help and comfort us; our hearts were much
tendered by his divine love. The taking leave of our dear friends here was
almost heartrending. There is a precious seed in this place, which I
trust, is a little deeper rooted since our last visit, and it is the
prayer of my heart, that the Saviour may water and watch over it, and that
it may produce abundance of fruit to his praise.


They took their departure on the 2nd of the Twelfth Month, and arrived in
London on the 13th, travelling through the north of France twelve days and
six nights.


Through divine mercy we arrived safe in London, on Seventh-day evening,
and lodged with our beloved relations at Highbury, who received us with
all possible affection. Our spirits on meeting, mingled in silent sorrow,
while we were enabled to rejoice in God our Saviour. On First-day morning
we went over to Stamford-hill, and soon were introduced to our beloved
brother, who was perfectly sensible, but extremely weak. The peace and
serenity which we were favored to feel by him was an inexpressible comfort
to our sorrowful hearts.


A.B. Savory died the next Third-day evening, and his remains were interred
on the First-day following.


21_st_.--This was the day fixed for the solemn occasion of
accompanying the remains to the tomb. The body was taken into the
meeting-house at Newington, and the company of mourners and all present
were, I believe, comforted and edified through the tender mercies of our
Heavenly Father. J.J. Gurney's communication was particularly precious; he
also paid a consoling visit to the family after dinner.


We shall conclude this chapter with some reflections made by John
Yeardley, on reviewing the changes which death had produced in the circle
of his relations:--


1835. 1 _mo_. 31.--Waking this morning, I took a view of the great
ravages death had made in our families; when this exhortation pressed
suddenly and with peculiar force on my heart,--Be thou also ready. My soul
responded, Thou Lord, alone, canst make me ready. O gracious Saviour, who
died for me, be pleased to redeem me from the bond of corruption, and
purify my heart from earthly things.




CHAPTER XIV.


FROM THE END OF THE THIRD CONTINENTAL JOURNEY, IN 1834, TO THE
COMMENCEMENT OF THE FOURTH, IN 1842.

During the seven years comprised in this chapter, the materials which
exist for delineating John and Martha Yeardley's history are meagre. Of
the numerous journeys which they made in the course of this period, the
record kept by the former frequently consists of a mere itinerary.

After attending the Leeds Quarterly Meeting in the Third Month, they
returned to their home at Scarborough, but soon left it again to be
present at the Yearly Meeting in London. The Society of Friends began
about this time to be agitated by differences of opinion, chiefly on
points of doctrine. John Yeardley not only kept himself sedulously free
from the spirit of party, but, whether from a natural aversion to public
life, or from the fear of exceeding the limit of his own calling and
abilities, he abstained from taking a prominent position, and left it very
much to others to sway the affairs of the Church. But he was not unmindful
of the dangers by which the Society was assailed, and he bent the force of
his mental vigor and Christian experience towards the promotion of
individual growth in grace and faithfulness to the divine call, and the
diffusion of clear and comprehensive views of Scriptural truth; and when
the hour came for sympathising with those who were harassed by doubts, or
such as were subjected to trial by the effect of religious dissension, he
was ready, with his beloved partner, to share the burden of the afflicted,
to probe the wounds of those who had been bruised, and to pour in the oil
of heavenly consolation.

His note regarding the Yearly Meeting is short:--


The business was of a most important nature, and sometimes very trying. We
had strong proof that many spirits professing to have made long progress
in the Christian life were not enough subdued by the humbling power of
divine grace; but through all, I trust, our heavenly Father dealt with us
in mercy, and sent help and wisdom to direct and strengthen his poor
tribulated children.


On returning to Scarborough, he writes:--


I humbly trust our hearts are truly grateful to the Author of all our
mercies, who has granted us once more a little rest of body and sweet
peace of mind; but, as it regards myself, I must say that inward poverty
has prevailed more since my return home than it has done for the last two
years of absence. It is well to know how to suffer want, as well as to
abound.


Want of occupation was not one of John Yeardley's trials, even when
"standing," as he expressed it, "free from any prospect of immediate
service, and feeling much as a vessel not likely to be brought into use
again." Scriptural inquiry, the study of languages, and of the history of
the Church, watching the progress of religious light and liberty on the
Continent of Europe, his garden, the binding of his books--these were the
employments of his industrious leisure. To these must be added the time
bestowed on several small publications from his own and his wife's pen
(the latter chiefly poetical), of which the "Eastern Customs," a volume
which was the product of their united labor, and the materials for which
were supplied by their journey to Greece, is the best known.

But there was another object which drew largely on John Yeardley's time
during his residence at Scarborough. This was the unsectarian schools
established in the town for the education of the industrial classes. Of
these the Lancasterian School for girls was his favorite, and the deep and
steady interest which he manifested for the improvement of the children,
as well as the peculiar talent which he evinced for attracting and
developing the youthful mind, are shown in an affectionate tribute to his
memory by the late mistress of the school:--


For many years he was a visitor at our Lancasterian School, where it was
his delight to impart knowledge to a numerous class of girls. He had a
happy method of communicating information. The children used to listen
with the greatest attention and delight; they never wearied of his
lessons. Scriptural instruction was his first object; the children were
questioned on what they had read, and it was delightful to watch their
countenances whilst he explained portions of Scripture, which he
frequently illustrated by the manners and customs of Eastern nations; and
this he did in a way that rendered his teaching valuable, as he did not
fail to make an impression and gain the affections of his hearers.

One little girl we had whom he used to call the _oracle_; and indeed
she was not inappropriately so-called; for whenever any of the girls were
at a loss for an answer, they invariably turned to her, and seldom failed
to receive a response to their silent appeal. This gifted child died
between the ages of sixteen and eighteen; he was a frequent visitor at her
bedside during a lingering illness, and it was his privilege to see that
his labors had not been in vain.

I shall _never_ forget him, not only for the important instruction I
derived from him, but also for his valuable assistance. During my labors
of more than twenty-five years, I had none to help me as he did. When at
home he never failed to visit as every afternoon: no matter what the state
of the weather was--snow, wind or rain--he was to be seen at half-past
two, with his large cape folded round him, bending before the blast,
toiling up the hill near the school. So accustomed were we to him that his
coming was deemed a matter of course.

After our Scripture lesson a portion of time was devoted to geography,
particularly Bible geography; then he would talk to them of places where
he had travelled: his descriptions of the Ionian Islands, the people and
the schools he had visited there, used to be a favorite theme, and very
interesting. In this way our afternoons were passed, and truly they were
times of profitable instruction.

He seemed to care less for the boys' school; he did occasionally visit
them, but the girls were his pets. I have sometimes thought his knowledge
of the ignorant and degraded state of the females in Greece was the cause
of his taking so much interest in the education of the females in his own
land.

In addition to J. Yeardley's labors at the Lancasterian School, some of
the older girls and a few others who belonged to the school assembled at
his house one evening in the week, whom he instructed in reading and
Scriptural knowledge. Some of these still speak with gratitude of the
benefit they then received.


In the Ninth Month of 1835, John and Martha Yeardley visited Settle
Monthly Meeting, and Knaresborough, under appointment of the Quarterly
Meeting. On their way thither they took up at York their aged and valued
friend Elizabeth Rowntree of Scarborough, who was on the appointment.


Her company, says J.Y., was a strength and comfort to us; she exercised
her gift as an elder in a very acceptable manner, in many of the families
we visited, as well as in the meetings for discipline.


This notice is succeeded almost immediately by the record of Elizabeth
Rowntree's sudden decease:--


On the 25th of the Eleventh Month, we were introduced into deep affliction
by the sudden removal of our precious elder, E. Rowntree. Her dependence
for salvation was fixed on her Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, through the
help of whose Spirit she had been enabled to lead a life of godliness and
of usefulness to her fellow-mortals, and was always concerned to give the
praise to Him to whom it was due,--the Lord of Lords.


This event, with the removal of another pilgrim to become an inhabitant of
the world of beatified spirits, and the pressing subject of the divisions
in the Society, form the topics of the following letter from Martha
Yeardley to Elizabeth Dudley:--


Scarborough, 12 mo. 5, 1835.

During our long sojourn last spring, in and about my native city, my
spirit was deeply oppressed, nor did the conflicts endured appear to
produce much benefit either to myself or others. Here the way is more
open, and, although we also deeply feel the effects of the storm which has
been permitted to assail our little Society, we are more able to endure
it; and desire to abide in our tents, except when called upon to defend
that immediate teaching of the blessed Saviour, upon which we depend for
our little portion of daily bread. I can truly sympathise with thee, my
beloved Betsy, an having to bear more of the burden and heat of the day,
and I do fervently believe with thee, that the more, as individuals, we
commit and confide the cause to the Great Master, in humble prayer, the
sooner it will be extricated from the perplexities which now harass and
distress those who are truly devoted to it.

We have deeply to mourn for our endeared and highly valued E. Rowntree,
suddenly taken from us about ten days since. She and her sister R.S., from
Whitby, had spent the preceding evening with us; she was in usual health,
and sweetly cheerful, rejoicing that she had been enabled to assist dear
Sarah Squire in a family visit to Friends of this meeting, though she did
not sit with her in the families. I heard of her illness and hastened to
her; she appeared sensible but for a very few moments after having been
got to bed; yet was heard begging for patience under extreme agony; then
added, We had need live the life of the righteous, for it is an awful
thing to die. Then she suddenly sank into a slumber, and lay till a little
after nine at night, when her purified spirit was peacefully liberated.

We have got through Pontefract and some meetings in the neighborhood to
our comfort, and on the journey had an opportunity of sitting beside the
dying bed of dear Sarah Dent, which was indeed a peaceful scene. She was
perfectly sensible, and so animated that I could hardly give up hope of
her restoration. But she had not herself the least prospect of life, and
said that, although she had found it a hard struggle to give up her
husband and children, she had, through the mercy of her gracious Redeemer,
attained to perfect resignation. This was about a week before her death,
and we have heard since, that a little before the close, she said, The
Lord Jesus is near, I want you all to know that He is near indeed!

Dear Ann Priestman has united with us in visiting this Monthly Meeting: it
seems now best for us to remain at home for a short time, under the
bereavement which our own meeting has suffered.


In 1836 they again attended the Yearly Meeting; of which John Yeardley
thus speaks:--


The Yearly Meeting was, I think, on the whole, satisfactory, much more so
than many Friends could look for, considering the discouraging
circumstances under which we came together. The main bent in all the
important deliberations on subjects of great moment to the well-being of
our small section of the universal church, was to adhere to the long-known
principles of the Society, and to turn aside the sentiments of opposing
individuals in the spirit of gentleness, forbearance and love.


They visited many meetings in going from and returning to Scarborough. The
most interesting of these visits was at Thame, in Oxfordshire, which John
Yeardley thus describes:--


6 _mo._ 14.--Went in the evening to Thame, and had a meeting with a
few who have met in the way of Friends for about five years at Grove End.
There are only seven or eight who meet regularly, but they are often
joined by a few others. No notice had been given to their neighbors of our
coming, but on seeing us go to the meeting many followed; the room was
quite filled, and a precious meeting it was. Their hearts are like ground
prepared for the good seed of the kingdom. The nature of spiritual worship
was pointed out, and testimony borne to the teaching of the Holy Spirit.

This little company reminded us of many such which we met with in foreign
countries, particularly in Switzerland and Germany. We had a good deal of
conversation with William Wheeler, who was one of the first to meet in
silence. He was a leader in the Wesleyan congregation, and became uneasy
with giving out hymns to be sung with those whose states he knew did not
correspond with the words. He would then sometimes select a hymn most
suited by its general character to the company; at other times he would
leave out a few verses, and select others which he thought might be sung
with truth by the whole congregation; but the thing became so burdensome
that he was obliged, for conscience' sake, to leave it altogether, and sit
down with a few others in silence. At first they met with opposition, and
even persecution, from persons who came to their meeting to disperse them.
On one of these occasions a few rude young men had banded together to
beset them the next meeting-day, and disperse them. W.W. was strongly
impressed that it was right for him to proclaim an awful warning to
some--that the judgments of the Almighty awaited them, that eternity was
nearer than they were aware and he wished them to consider and prepare for
it. One of the disturbers was taken suddenly ill, and died before the next
meeting-day; which produced such an effect on the others that they never
more molested the little company in their worship.


In reviewing this journey, J.Y. says, under date of the 25th of the Sixth
Month:--


I trust my faith is afresh confirmed in the gift of the Holy Spirit to
lead in the way of religious duty, and to give strength to do His will.
Lord, grant that the remainder of my days, whether few or many, be
entirely devoted to the holy cause of endeavoring to promote the Saviour's
kingdom on earth.


In 1837, John and Martha Yeardley were occupied with making circuits in
the service of the gospel through several counties of England. They were
attracted to Lancashire, which they visited in the autumn, by the peculiar
state of some meetings in that county, an extensive secession having taken
place not long before. The difficulties which they had to encounter on
this journey are represented in a letter from Martha Yeardley to her
sisters, written at Manchester the 4th of the Ninth Month, 1837.


I do not recollect that, in my little experience, I ever had more
preparatory exercise of mind to pass through; and I believe it has been
the same with my dear J.Y. We have, however, in many of our visits, been
much comforted under the belief that those who remain firm in the
testimonies given us to bear are in a more lively state, and more banded
together, than has been the case heretofore, and that, through the mercy
of our holy Head and High Priest, there is a renewed visitation to many.
In the public meetings, of which we have had many, there has been a rather
remarkable openness to receive the truths of the gospel, united with our
view of the spirituality of this blessed dispensation.

We approached this place in deep prostration of spirit; and truly we feel
that all the previous baptism has been needful, in order to enable us in
any degree to perform our duty here. There has been a sore rending of the
tenderest ties, and the wounds are not yet healed. There are a few who
entertain ultra views, and their over-activity tends to keep up excitement
in those who are wavering and have not yet left the Society: this makes it
very difficult for moderate people to stand between them, and calls for
very deep indwelling with the blessed source of love. On the other hand
there are, I fear, very many who rejoice in the delusive suggestions of
our unwearied enemy--that the cross of Christ is not necessary--that they
may speak their own words and wear their own apparel, and still be called
by the name of Him who died for them. I think we never have had more to
suffer than in some of the meetings we have attended, from a disposition,
perhaps in some degree on both sides, to criticise ministry: still there
are, I believe, many precious individuals among the young and middle-aged
who are under the forming hand for usefulness. There is indeed a loud call
for laborers in this large and mixed meeting; and we are ready to weep
over the vacant seats of those who have deserted their post, and, I
greatly fear, are seeking to warm themselves and others with sparks of
their own kindling.


Another letter from M.Y., written at the conclusion of this journey,
supplies a few more traits of the Christian service into which they were
led in the course of it.


Scarborough, 10 mo. 7.

We remained nearly a month in our lodgings at Manchester, receiving and
paying visits, some of which were very interesting. Dear H. Stephenson and
family were extremely attentive, and her daughter Hannah was our constant
guide in that large place. We spent First-day at Rochdale, and in the
evening a large number of young Friends took tea with us, between thirty
and forty. This has mostly been the case on First-days, both at Manchester
and elsewhere, and these opportunities have tended to our relief.

After this we bade farewell to Lancashire, under feelings of thankfulness
which I cannot describe, for having been mercifully helped and preserved
through such a warfare.


In the autumn of 1839 they again travelled southwards, directing their
steps through the eastern counties of England, and London, Surrey, and
Hampshire, to the Isle of Wight, where they spent five weeks exploring its
coasts and corners, in search, not of the naturally picturesque, but of
the beautiful and hopeful in the moral and religious world. They returned
home by Bristol and Birmingham.

So attractive to their spirits was the Isle of Wight, that the next year
they repeated the visit, going thither after the Yearly Meeting. In the
Seventh Month they attended the Quarterly Meeting at Alton, and on their
return to Newport were accompanied by Elizabeth and Mary Dudley and
Margaret Pope. They remained in Newport and the vicinity several weeks,
during which time, amongst other engagements, they conducted a Scripture
class with some young persons three evenings a week. In a letter dated the
27th of the Sixth Month, J.Y. says:--


My dear Martha feels deeply for the Unitarians in this place; we sometimes
think the way may open for us to help them a little. Their great
stumbling-stones are, the want of clearness in the mystery of the oneness
in the Godhead, and of faith in the practical influences of the Holy
Spirit, as operating on the heart of man. Our morning reading opens a
suitable door of communication for those whose curiosity prompts them to
seek our company.


In company with Elizabeth Dudley they hold several public meetings at
various places on the island. They have left no record of this service,
but we have a notice of the meeting at Porchfield, in a letter from E.D.


The meeting was very satisfactory, sweet and refreshing to our spirits.
The road was rough and hilly. We were behind time, and our friends being
punctual, the house looked full when we got there, though more followed,
until not only within but outside the walls there was a crowd of orderly,
attentive people. Many of them were happily acquainted with the power of
religion in their hearts, and prepared for spiritual worship. The assembly
was composed of various denominations from a straggling village and more
remote habitations. The chapel was built many years ago, by a pious man,
now above eighty years old, who was with us, and who enjoys to have the
place used by any who from love to Christ and the souls of men are
attracted to visit them. The simplicity and openness to be observed and
felt that evening was a comforting indication of freedom from party
spirit, and those vain disputations which in so many instances keep
Christians at a distance, and mar their individual peace as well as
usefulness.


Before they left Newport, they provided, with the help of several friends,
suitable accommodation for the little meeting of Friends in that town. On
taking leave of the island, which they did in the Eighth Month, John
Yeardley remarks:--


We have had much comfort and satisfaction in our sojourn in this place: a
strong evidence is felt in our hearts that it has been ordered by the
Lord. We have cause to acknowledge that our labors have been owned by the
Divine Presence in our various exercise for the promotion of the Saviour's
kingdom.


In the spring of 1841 they repeated their visit to the Isle of Wight,
spent great part of the summer in religious service in Essex, and visited
afterwards Bristol, Bath, and other parts of Somersetshire.

At Bath they remained for some weeks. Soon after their arrival in the
city, they were introduced into sympathetic sorrow on account of the death
of John Rutter, whose guests they were, and who was suddenly removed, by
an accident, from time to eternity. This event is described in a letter
from John Yeardley to his sister R. S.


Bath, 9 mo. 24, 1841.

The affectionate family of the Rutters gave us a hearty reception, and we
remained under their hospitable roof until Second-day, when they were
plunged into deep distress by the awfully sudden removal of their beloved
father. He went out before breakfast, and called at his son's wharf. A
cart of coals being about to be weighed, he was leading the horse on to
the machine; the animal, being a little unruly, suddenly rushed forward
and pushed down J. R, and the wheel passed over his body. He was
immediately conveyed to his own shop, when the spark of life became
extinct, and he ceased to breathe, without apparent pain or emotion. We
were nearly ready to leave our room, about half-past 6. o'clock, when one
of the sons knocked at our door, and related the awful occurrence. I went
down immediately: the scene may be more easily imagined by you than
described by me. We endeavored to calm them as much as possible; and,
though deeply afflicted, they bear the stroke with sweet resignation. I
wrote letters at their request to most of their near relatives; and as we
could not think of leaving the sorrowing family to go as proposed to
Bristol, we immediately procured a lodging and settled in, in the evening.

On Third-day afternoon we went to the Quarterly Meeting at Bristol, and
returned to Bath on Fifth day, not wishing to be long absent from the dear
sorrowing ones. We have a pleasant situation on the hill-side, called
Sidney Lodge, from which, when the gas is lighted, the city is presented
to our view like a beautiful panorama.


Their minds had been for some time in preparation for renewing, on the
Continent of Europe, Christian intercourse with some of their old friends,
and for exploring new veins of religious life in countries which they had
not yet visited. Accordingly, in the Fourth Month of 1842, they acquainted
the Friends of their Monthly Meeting with the prospect of missionary
service which had opened before them, informing them that from the
conclusion of their last European journey they had believed it would one
day be required of them to re-enter that field of labor. The Monthly
Meeting accorded its full and sympathetic approbation, which was endorsed
by the Quarterly Meeting at a conference of men and women Friends, of
which John Yeardley says:--


The great solemnity which prevailed was truly refreshing to our spirits,
and I believe to the spirits of many others. Our friends gave us their
full unity, _encouragement, sympathy,_ and _prayers_.


Martha Yeardley thus expresses the feelings with which she contemplated
this arduous journey, in a letter to Josiah Forster:--


It is indeed an awful engagement, now in the decline of life, and, with
respect to myself, under increasing infirmities; but I believe it best for
me not to look too far forward, but simply to confide in the mercy and
guidance of that blessed Saviour who has been our support and consolation
under many deep trials, humblingly believing that whether enabled to
accomplish the important prospect or not, it was an offering required at
our hands, and that we must leave the event to the Great Disposer of all
things.


In the same letter she mentions their having heard of the death of Louis
A. Majolier of Congenies, which, she says, although a cause of rejoicing
as it regards him, was read by us with mournful feelings, from the
recollection of his fatherly kindness in days that are past, and also from
renewed solicitude for the little flock in that country.

Before their departure they went once more into the West Riding, to see
how their brethren of J.Y.'s earliest acquaintance fared. They were
joined by William Dent of Marr, near Doncaster, with whom they were
"sweetly united in the fellowship of the gospel;" and they returned to
Scarborough with "grateful and peaceful hearts."




CHAPTER XV.


THE FOURTH CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1842-3.

In the journey which now lay before them, John and Martha Yeardley were
about to explore a part of Europe hitherto untried,--the province of
Languedoc, conspicuous in past ages for its superior enlightenment, but
now, owing to the temporary mastery of error, wrapt in ignorance and
gloom. In this mission, the opportunities which they found for reviving
and gathering together the scattered embers of truth, were nearly confined
to social intercourse; in seeking occasions for which, they availed
themselves of introductions by pious Prostestants from place to place,
whilst they were careful, as had always been their practice, to wait, in
every successive step, for the direction of the Divine Finger. The mission
was performed in much weakness of body, and under frequent spiritual
poverty; yet it will be readily acknowledged that theirs was a favored
lot, to be able, with the clue of gospel love in their hand, to trace the
pathway of Christian truth, and the footsteps of true spiritual worship,
and of a faithful testimony for Christ, through the midst of a degenerate
and benighted land.

They went to London on the 2nd of the Eighth Month, and spent the time
before they sailed in gathering information and counsel for their
approaching journey, and in social visits. Speaking of one of these visits
(to their nephew J. S., at Clapton), John Yeardley says:--


Before parting we had a religious opportunity, in which a word of
exhortation flowed in gospel love, and ability was granted to approach the
throne of mercy in solemn supplication. I often wish we were more faithful
in raising our hearts to the Lord before separating from our friends when
met on social occasions; a blessing might attend such simple offerings.


In a visit they paid to Thomas and Carolina Norton, the subject of
establishing a school for the children of Friends in the South of France
came under consideration; a project which, as we shall see, they were able
in their visit to that part of the country to carry into effect.

They left London on the 16th, and on the 19th arrived at Amiens, where
they halted for a few days. They found in this city a movement among the
Roman Catholics, a number of whom had joined the Protestant worship. The
Protestant Pastor, Cadoret, was very friendly to them; when he heard that
they belonged to the Society of Friends, he pressed John Yeardley's hand
and said, I am very glad to make your acquaintance; it is the first time I
have seen any of your Society, of whom I have heard much.

On the 20th J.Y. writes, in allusion to the spiritual darkness which so
generally covered the land of France;--


My soul is cast down, but when I am afflicted because of the wickedness of
the people, I call to remembrance these words: "Fret not thyself because
of evil-doers. Trust in the Lord and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the
land, and verily thou shalt be fed."--Psalm xxxvii. 1, 3.


A large number of workmen of various nations are employed at Amiens in
weaving. J. and M.Y., visited several of these in their cottages, and
before they left the city invited the people of this class to a meeting,
especially intended for their own countrymen, but open to all who were
willing to come. The meeting, says J.Y., was an occasion precious to our
souls; the Lord gave us ability to declare his word. I spoke in English
and my dear Martha in French.

At Paris, whither they proceeded on the 22nd, they were disappointed in
finding that the majority of the persons at whose houses they called were
in the country, and some with whom they had taken sweet counsel in former
years had been removed by death. Pastor Audebez was at home, and received
them with a cordial welcome. They were detained in Paris longer than they
had anticipated, by the illness of Martha Yeardley, and did not leave till
the 9th of the Ninth Month. The morning after they had entered Paris the
words of Job were brought to J.Y.'s recollection in a forcible
manner:--"Thou hast granted me life and favor, and thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit." (Job x. 12); and in going out of the city he was
refreshed with the joyful language of David,--"How excellent is thy
loving-kindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust
under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures. For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we
see light."--Psa. xxxvi. 7-9.

Some letters which John and Martha Yeardley received from England during
their sojourn in Paris show, the strong sympathy which accompanied them in
their journey, and contain, at the same time, references to events which
will be interesting to the reader.


South Grove, Peckham, 8 mo. 12, 1842.

Numbers vi. 24-27:--"The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make his
face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall put my name
upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them." To be pronounced by
Aaron the high, priest and his successors, as the type of Him by whom all
blessing and favor are bestowed on the church and her children.

The above portion of Holy Scripture, with the 121st Psalm, has been so
sweetly in my remembrance since parting with my beloved friends John
and Martha Yeardley, that, before retiring for the night, I transcribe the
words which convey, so much better than any language of my own, the
renewed and abiding desire under which they are committed to the care and
guidance of the Good Shepherd, in humble but confiding belief that he will
equally watch over, guard and keep, those who go and those who stay;
causing each, amidst all variety of circumstances, to realize the
soul-cheering truth, that, at the throne of grace, mercy is obtained and
grace to help in time of need. May the peace which passeth all
understanding keep our hearts and minds through Jesus Christ, prays your
nearly-attached friend and sister,

E. DUDLEY.

THE SAME TO MARTHA YEARDLEY.

Peckham, 8 mo. 21, 1842.

While in the sick-chamber of my sister, instead of at meeting, it feels
pleasant to devote part of the evening to thee, my beloved friend. I have
enjoyed the thought of your having a good Sabbath at Paris, where, no
doubt, a sphere of duty will be found, and perhaps many exercises of faith
and patience attend the labor of love which may await you there; while, in
the spirit of true dedication and acquiescence so mercifully bestowed upon
you, no commandment will be counted grievous, nor any service for your
Lord too hard or painful. His words come sweetly to my mind as really the
portion of a brother and sister dear in the bond and power of an endless
life,--"Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they
hear."

Accounts from various parts of this land continue to indicate much
unsettlement, and there have been large companies of Chartists in the
immediate vicinity of London; but happily the civil power proved equal to
their dispersion. One would hope the abundant harvest, now ready to be
gathered, may turn the current of feeling, and induce the desire rather to
praise the Lord for his goodness, than to spend time and strength in
murmurings and disputings with their fellow-mortals. The destruction, not
only of property, but of life; in some recent contests, is quite
appalling, and we certainly live in very eventful times; the tendency,
however, both of the good and evil, is so obviously towards an increase of
light and knowledge, that it seems warrantable to expect _all_ will
be overruled to better views and practices becoming more general, and the
kingdoms of this world being thankfully surrendered to the righteous
government of the Prince of Peace. But alas! deep and complicated may be
the sufferings yet behind for the church and her children to endure,
whether in being sharers in, or but the witnesses of, what is pronounced
upon the world of the ungodly.

FROM JOHN ROWNTREE.

Scarborough, 8 mo. 29, 1842.

The account of your proceedings at Amiens has been particularly
interesting to me. Whether manufacturing employments are unfavorable or
otherwise to moral and religions character; or whether it is merely the
larger earnings which artizans receive, enabling them more glaringly to
gratify their natural and corrupt inclinations than agricultural laborers,
can do; whether the passive ignorance of the country laborer, or the more
active and intelligent habits, yet combined with moral darkness, of the
manufacturing operative, most retards the diffusion of religious truth,
are serious questions for us in this country. Our manufacturers have been
alarming the whole nation, and threatening us with something like
political revolution; but they have received a severe lesson, and many of
our jails are filled with the victims of unprincipled agitators.
Considering how little of the Christian spirit is generally found in the
operations of government, the treatment of these poor creatures has on the
whole been lenient, and no very severe punishments are anticipated.

Whether the people of this nation have learned more of righteousness from
the judgments of the Lord, which have I think evidently been made known in
this part of his earth, is perhaps known only to Him who knoweth all
things. I often fear;--for surely there is very much of darkness and
wickedness among us--yet I can not unfrequently hope that light is
spreading, and that although the powers of evil are active and strongly
developed, yet the active diffusion of the means of good more than keeps
pace with them. "Greater is He that is in you than he that is in the
world," is still a consoling assurance to many dejected yet hoping
believers. Our dear friend Hannah C. Backhouse is strong in the faith that
light increasing, that the fields are white already for harvest, and that
the Lord of the harvest is preparing and sending forth laborers into his
harvest.

The Protestants whom you found at Amiens, and in some other places, would
probably remain totally unknown to ordinary travellers, and perhaps we do
not enough consider how little known in a great nation the salt that
preserves it may be. The reports from the agent of the Bible Society in
France seem to me more than usually encouraging. I hope you may be enabled
to impart some spiritual gift or knowledge to many hidden ones who appear
to be hungering and thirsting after righteousness in that vain-glorious
nation, and that your faith may be strengthened by meeting with such.


John and Martha Yeardley arrived at Lyons on the 13th, and, after making
some calls, intended to proceed to Nismes the next day. But not feeling
satisfied to leave the city so soon, they concluded to remain there one
day more; and they had cause to be thankful in having taken this course.


For, says J.Y., we have made the acquaintance of several religious
persons. An evangelist and colporteur named Hermann Lange, a German Swiss,
took us to see some Protestant converts, amongst whom we have found much
of the interior life. The Lord gave me a word of exhortation for them, and
helped me to utter it in French. We had a conversation with our friend
Lange respecting the ministry in our Society. Like many other persons he
supposed we had no recognized ministers; we explained the usage of
Friends, and showed him our certificates, with which he was pleased. He
admired the good order in use amongst us, and said that he had for a long
time desired to be informed respecting the principles of Friends; that he
thought as we did, that an express call of the Holy Spirit was necessary
to the ministry, and that women as well as men ought to be allowed to
preach, I felt intimately united to him in spirit: on parting we gave him
some tracts explanatory of our principles.

Lyons is the head-quarters of popery; the Jesuits here exert a strong
influence with the government against the Protestants. We visited a good
man named Elfenbein, who with his wife, is very useful to the awakened
Protestants. He is a colporteur, and introduces the Holy Scriptures into
families to whom he speaks concerning the things of God. He and his wife
called upon us in our hotel. On parting he proposed we should pray
together. This gave us the opportunity of explaining our sentiments
regarding prayer; and we proposed remaining a while in silence, and if it
should please the Lord to put words of prayer into our heart, we would
express them with the help of the Holy Spirit. After a time of silence,
Elfenbein prayed for us with unction in a few words: it was a favored
time; thanks be to God.


On the 15th they resumed their journey, and passing through Nismes
proceeded to Congenies. They found there Edward and John Pease, who were
travelling on a religious errand, and were about concluding their labors
in those parts. The meeting was a source of comfort on both sides. The
next day, which was First-day, was a solemn season: the gospel message was
largely delivered in the little meeting-house, and Christine Majolier
interpreted for those who spoke in English. The Two-months' Meeting was
held, and here, as well indeed as on every other occasion, the English
Friends missed the company and help of their valued friend, Louis A.
Majolier.

After residing for a while at Congenies, they removed to Nismes, where
they preached to the strangers who attended the usual meetings for
worship, distributed religious tracts in the city and its environs, and
instituted a Scripture Reading Meeting for the young. But the object which
most strongly engaged their attention at Nismes was the foundation of a
boarding-school for the daughters of Friends. Louis Majolier, during a
great part of his life had conducted a day-school at Congenies: this
school was, of course, not accessible to the children of those Friends who
lived at a distance; and soon after L.M. died even this was given up, and
the means of education in the Society failed altogether. In their project
for supplying this deficiency, John and Martha Yeardley found the parents
and other Friends ready to second their efforts; and at the Two-months'
Meeting in the Eleventh Month, it was resolved to establish in the first
place a school for girls only at Nismes, and a committee was appointed to
carry this resolution into effect. A mistress was found without much
difficulty in Justine Benezet, a valuable Friend, who had had for sixteen
years the superintendence of the Orphan Asylum, and whose health had in
some degree given way under the too onerous charge.

In reference to the accomplishment of this undertaking, J.Y. writes:--


12 _mo_. 14.--_Nehemiah_ i. 11:--"O Lord, I beseech thee, let
now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer
of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name; and prosper, I pray thee,
thy servant this day." I often think of these words of the prophet, and
they [have supported me] when my soul has been cast down on account of the
school.


During their abode at Nismes they visited the little congregations of
Friends which lie to the westward of that city, and had to record that
the presence of their Divine Master went with them, giving them his word
to declare, and inclining the hearts of the hearers to receive it.

A letter from John Rowntree, which reached them towards the end of the
year, contains some observations on the work they had found to do in their
journey, with an interesting notice of what was passing in England.


Scarborough, 11 mo. 14, 1842.

MY DEAR FRIENDS,

.... The plan of your meetings for Scripture instruction seems to me
particularly good; you will, through them, have numerous opportunities for
impressing on the minds of your hearers the inestimable value of the Holy
Scriptures, when properly received, and made available by the enlightening
influence of the Holy Spirit, and the worthlessness--nay, the danger--of
resting satisfied with a mere knowledge of their words. The words of our
Lord were "spirit and life" to those who would receive them as such; yet
how many who heard them were to be judged by them at the that day, because
they believed not.

We still hear sad accounts of distress in the manufacturing districts of
the country. Some of your friends have probably informed you that at our
last Quarterly Meeting much sympathy was expressed for the destitute
artizans, and a liberal subscription was commenced, and was to be carried
forward in all our meetings for their relief: a few days ago it amounted
to L800--I hope it will exceed L1000: but what is that, it may be said,
among so many? yet I hope much good may be done by it, and Friends in
other parts of the nation seem to be considering whether they ought not to
make some efforts for similar purposes. At Liverpool we hear that upwards
of L200 has been raised.

You will probably have heard of the very sudden death of Jonathan
Backhouse, whilst his wife was laboring under a religious engagement in
the north of our county. His change seemed a translation from that state
of strong but imperfect love which a member of the militant Church might
feel here below, to that fullness of love which his Saviour had purchased
for him above.


In the Third Month, 1843, they quitted Nismes, taking their young friend
Jules Paradon as their companion.


The parting, says J.Y., from the dear family at the school was sorrowful.
Before taking leave, we had a religious opportunity with the children, in
which all hearts were touched.


They arrived at Montpelier on the 7th. The pious characters to whom they
were introduced in this city were mostly of the upper class--bankers,
doctors, lawyers, and professors. They found that the principles of the
Society of Friends were very little known there, but that many were
desirous of being acquainted with them. Being pressed in their spirit to
propose a meeting for worship with such as were disposed to give their
company, their new friends readily agreed to it, and about thirty-five
persons sat down with them at their inn. The assembly was, as they
believed, owned by the great Master, who showed himself to be their
strength in the time of weakness, and gave them power to preach the gospel
and explain the nature of true worship. Pastor Lissignol and Dr. Parlier
were amongst those to whom they were the most united. The latter filled
the office of mayor when Josiah Forster and Elizabeth Fry were at
Montpelier. He told John and Martha Yeardley that the meeting they had
just held had been strengthening to his faith. That the Lord by his Spirit
should move the hearts of his children in a distant land to visit his
heritage in other countries, he regarded as a proof of his love; and he
spoke of the unity of spirit which is felt by those of different nations
who love the same Lord, as a precious mark of discipleship.


The town of Montpelier, say J. and M.Y., is built with taste and elegance,
and the situation is most delightful: there are 4,000 Protestants in a
population of 86,000. On Sixth-day (the 10th) we left this place of deep
interest, with hearts grateful to the God and Father of all our sure
mercies, in that he had enabled us to bear a testimony to the spirituality
of worship as set forth by our Saviour himself.


After leaving Montpelier, they continue the narrative of their journey
as follows:--


We lodged that night at Passanas, a dark Roman Catholic town. Inquiring if
there were any Protestants, the chambermaid replied, "Protestants! what is
that?" When we had made her understand, she said there were a few, but
they went to Montagnac to _mass_.

11_th_.--We slept at Narbonne, an ancient town of 10,000 inhabitants.
No openness to receive even a tract; the inquiry for a Protestant excited
an evident bitterness in the reply.

On the 12th, held our little meeting with our faithful friend Jules, in
which ability was granted to supplicate for the spread of divine light
over this benighted district. At 9 o'clock we set out to make a
Sabbath-day's journey: the wind extremely high and always in our face,
which fatigued Nimrod [their horse] as well as ourselves. We dined at
Lesengnan: not a Protestant in the place, yet we met with a circumstance
worth recording. Jules, who is ever watchful to find out who can read,
gave a few tracts to some boys in the stable-yard. When I went out, writes
J.Y., to see our horse, several rather bright-looking boys followed me,
asking for books. After ascertaining that they, could read, I supplied
them. This was no sooner known, than boys and girls came in crowds, soon
followed by many of their parents. As our visitors increased, I ran
upstairs to fetch my dear M.Y., and we embraced the opportunity to speak
to them on the importance of religion. No doubt curiosity drew many to us,
for we were a novel sight there, and the mingled multitude was not less so
to us. Among our auditors was a messenger of Satan to buffet us. He was a
good-looking man, who expressed a seeming approval of what we had done,
saying we made many friends. We told him they were all children of the
same Almighty Parent, and that there was but one true religion, and one
heaven. This observation drew off his mask, and he began to express doubts
whether either heaven or hell really existed, and brought forward the
threadbare argument of not believing what he could not see or prove. We
asked him if he had a soul: he said he had. We asked him how be knew that
he had a soul, for he could not see it: he replied, he believed that he
had a soul, but that his soul would die with his body. We then asked him
why two and two made four: he said he could not tell, and yet acknowledged
he was bound to believe it. The countenances of many around beamed with
joy at seeing this darkling perplexed; and we did not shrink from
exhorting him to repentance and faith in Christ, who died for him and for
all men.

On returning to our room the landlady entered with a fine-looking girl,
for whom she begged a book. This opened our way to speak to her of things
connected with salvation. She said,--"We have not much of religion here."
"Why so?" we asked. "Because the people do not like to confess to
the priests." "And what is the use," said we, "of confessing to man?"
"Because," she replied in somewhat trembling accents, "we think it eases
our consciences, for the priests are the appointed ministers to take
charge of our souls." "What," we replied, "a man take charge of immortal
souls! God never committed the power to forgive sins to man: Jesus Christ
alone can pardon sins; he died to save us!" I shall never forget the
countenance of this dear woman, which seemed to express her long-shaken
confidence in her spiritual guides. We exhorted her to come to the
Saviour, who intercedes for us without the aid of man, and gave her a New
Testament, which she said she would read.

12_th_.--Went to Maux to sleep. The landlady was communicative: she
told us that some travellers like ourselves some time ago had given her a
New Testament, which she had lent about the village, together with tracts,
and that she wished for more. We inquired if there were any persons in the
village who would like to come to us for books. She soon sent us an
interesting young woman, a schoolmistress, to whom on her entrance we
presented some tracts. She regarded them with an air of thoughtfulness
which seemed to measure the quantity to be taken by the price she would
have to pay for them. When she found they were to be had gratis, her
countenance brightened, and with it the brightness of her mind showed
itself. On speaking with her of the responsibility of her profession, and
the importance of imbuing the minds of children with just principles, she
said, "I am desirous of instructing the children in the religion of the
heart. Religion," added she, "though a good thing, is badly put in
practice in our church; the people do not like to confess to the priests,
and there is a great desire for instruction and to receive books."


They saw again at the Inn at Maux the man who had opposed them at
Lessengnan, and found him much better disposed than he had been the day
before. He told them he had been a Romish priest, but being disgusted with
the practices of his church, he had left it and joined the army: he
promised to read the books they gave him.


Our present mode of travelling (with our own horse), they continue, though
somewhat slow, affords opportunities of endeavoring to do a little good,
which we should miss in travelling by Diligence or extra-post. It is
curious and instructive to observe the various dispositions of the people
in the dark places through, which we pass: sometimes they are so fanatical
as to tear a tract before our face; others receive them with joy. During a
half-hour's rest for our horse at a village near Castelnaudry, my M.Y.
made the acquaintance of an aged woman at the door of her cottage, who
really did us good. On inquiring if she could read, "It is my
consolation," said she, "to read the Scriptures." "And we have great need
of consolation," we answered. "Yes," said she, "I am a widow of near
eighty years, and have had many cares; but I pray to God, and he grants me
the consolation of his Holy Spirit, and if I confide in him he will never
forsake me."


At Castelnaudry they left the main road and crossed the mountains to
Saverdun, in order to visit the Orphan Institution in that place.


By not going first to Toulouse, remarks John Yeardley, we saved about
thirty miles of travelling; but it was ill-spared, for one part of the
road was so bad that it required a forespan of two oxen to drag the
carriage through the deep mire and over the dangerous ditches. After a
little dinner at a poor place in the mountains, we procured a mule as a
reinforcement; for we stuck so fast in the mud that I never expected we
should be able to extricate ourselves. My poor M.Y. had to walk a great
part of the way; I am quite sure extra strength was given us for the
emergency. We lodged at Mazeres, where we called on the Protestant
minister Besiere, a most open-hearted Christian. He knew some of our
Society, and wherever this is the case it insures us a welcome. On our
telling him the dangers we had encountered on the road, and that we had
escaped unhurt, he sweetly said,--"The Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about them that fear Him, and delivereth them."--Psal. xxxiv. 7.

On arriving at Saverdun, on the 17th, we immediately pursued the object of
our visit, and proceeded to the Institution, where we delivered our
letters of recommendation, and received a cordial reception from the
director, Pastor Enjalbal. When the _little porters_ opened the door,
they cried one to another, "Voila des Anglais!" The director seems to be
wonderfully fitted for the post he fills. He was once a captain in the
army. After his conversion, his heart was penetrated with gratitude to his
Saviour for bringing him to a knowledge of the truth, and he desired to
devote the remainder of his days in doing good to his fellow-creatures,
particularly in the instruction of youth. The project of the Saverdun
school was then in agitation, and a manager was wanted. The excellent
Pastor Chabrand applied to him, knowing him to be the man for the office
if he would only undertake it. When he visited him for this purpose on
behalf of the committee, he found him in his chamber weeping, and, as his
confidential friend, he asked him what was the matter. "Why," said he, "my
heart overflows with love to the Saviour, for all that he has done for me,
and I seem to live without doing anything for his cause in return."
"Well," said the pastor, "but the way is now open for you; I am come with
a proposal from the committee for you to accept the government of the
Saverdun Institution; but I will not have an answer from you at present:
weigh the matter for a fortnight, and I will come again and receive your
decision." A sense of duty decided him to accept the offer.

The superintendent conducted us to the members of the committee, to whom
we had brought a kind introduction from Pastor Frossard of Nismes. The
supporters of this institution, are the most influential in the town,
rich, and withal pious characters. The Mayor, their secretary, is very
active: he with his wife, an excellent woman, and several members of the
committee, met us in the evening at our inn; they appeared to be greatly
interested in works of benevolence, and in everything connected with
religion and education.

_Toulouse_, 3 _mo_. 20.--We arrived in this great and busy city
on Seventh-day evening. Our first call was on the brothers Courtois, to
whom we had letters of introduction from our Christian friends at Nismes.
They received us in a most cordial manner and were very open and
communicative.

On First-day morning, after our little meeting, we called on Professor F.
Banner; he was rejoiced to see my M.Y., whom he knew at Congenies twenty
years ago. He was then a Roman Catholic; indeed, in name he is not
changed; but he is become very spiritually-minded, and much attached to
Friends and our principles, believing them, as he said, to be the nearest
in accordance of any with the doctrines of the New Testament. He has been,
with his wife, several times to our hotel, and we feel sweet unity with
his quiet exercised spirit. His situation here is important, having a
boarding-school for the children of Protestants, with a few Roman
Catholics, his piety and sincerity securing to him the confidence of both
parties, which is matter of wonder in this day of religious conflict. He
is one of those characters, more of whom we are desirous of finding; one
who wishes rather to enlighten than to censure the dark prejudices of men.

We spent the evening with our kind friends the Courtois, and attended
worship in their house. F.C. read the parable of the great supper
(Luke xiv.), and made some remarks in explication of it; after which
Pastor Chabrand spoke with much feeling on the influence of the Holy
Spirit, the gradual operation of the Spirit in the secret of the soul, and
the preciousness of dwelling in Christ, as the branch in the vine, in
order to bear fruit.

Pastor Chabrand told us in conversation that the first time he really saw
the state of his soul and his need of a Saviour, was in the meeting-house
at Westminster during half an hour's silence. After this time of precious
silence a minister arose[8] and spoke in so remarkable a manner to his
state, unfolding the history of his life, that he was melted to tears.
Ever since that time he has appreciated the principles of our religious
Society, and particularly our practice of waiting upon God in silence.
These remarks opened our way to speak on a subject which has often given
us pain in our intercourse with pious people, viz., the practice of going
suddenly from one religious exercise to another. We expressed our opinion
that Christians, in general, in their worship, would derive more
edification from what is spoken, if they were to dwell under the good
feeling which is sometimes raised, before passing so precipitately to
singing, or even to prayer. With this he entirely agreed, and thought it a
point of the utmost importance; he wished it could be put in practice, for
their church in general suffered loss for want of more quiet gathering of
spirit before God.


John and Martha Yeardley did not go further towards the west than
Toulouse; on quitting that city they turned northwards to Montauban.


For several days, so they write, before reaching the extent of our journey
westward, we travelled through a fertile country, having the Pyrenean
mountains on the south, covered with snow, a magnificent sight for those
who travel to see the beauties of nature, but our hearts are often too
heavy to enjoy them.

_Montauban_, 3 _mo_. 23.--Last evening we reached this pretty
town, part of which is built on a high cliff overlooking the river Tarn,
and commanding an extensive view over a fertile plain. Our first call was
on Professor Monod; his wife is an Englishwoman; she was pleased to see
her compatriots, and introduced us to Professor de Felice and some other
pious individuals. Professor Monod invited us to spend the evening at
their house, along with a number of persons who join in their family
reading, and we did not think it right to refuse the invitation. A pretty
large company assembled in the professor's room at 8 o'clock, among whom
were some students of the college. The eighth chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans was read, and some remarks made by the professor; he then
kindly said, if we had any word of exhortation in our hearts, he hoped we
should feel quite at liberty to express it. We felt it right to make some
observations with reference to the fore-part of the chapter, which sets
forth that state of Christian experience in which the mind is prepared to
participate in the many precious promises contained in the middle and
latter portions; ability was also given us to express our faith in the one
Saviour and Mediator, and in the influence and guidance of the Holy
Spirit, and his office in the sanctification of the soul. This favored
opportunity closed with supplication. We are well satisfied with our visit
to this place; it has removed some prejudices from our minds, and perhaps
may have shown to those with whom we have had intercourse that Friends are
sound in the faith. The short time we spent with Professor de Felice has
left a sweet impression on our minds. He mourned over the want of
spiritual life among the Protestants of Montauban, amid, as he said, "much
preaching, and many appeals to conscience."


At Castres, where they stopped on the 26th, they visited the Orphan House,
and held intercourse with the pastors, and with a pious lawyer.


On our journey, says John Yeardley, we had heard of a man near this town
who bore the name of Quaker, and we inquired of the lawyer if he knew
whether he was sound in the Christian faith. The lawyer spoke with respect
of the so-called Quaker, but thought that in his opinions he favored
Arianism. "If so," said I, rather hastily, "we will not seek him or
recognize." "Why," said the advocate, "it is the very reason you should go
to see him, and try to do him good." At this reply my conscience was stung
on account of my hasty conclusion; and after reflecting on the matter, we
walked next morning five or six miles into the country in search of the
new Friend. He received us with joy, and we soon satisfied ourselves as to
his soundness in the Christian faith; but he was rather ardent in his
expectations of the reign of Christ on the earth. Twenty years ago he
refused to take an oath on a jury; the judge told him he must go to
prison, to which the Friend replied, "I am willing to go to prison, but I
cannot swear to condemn any person to death; if you place me as juryman I
shall acquit all the criminals." The judge, believing his scruples to be
sincere, dismissed him without further trouble. This dear man attached
himself to us in such a manner that it was difficult to part from him; he
pressed us to remain some days in his house, but this our duty did not
permit.


From Castres they returned through Beziers to Nismes, visiting various
little companies of Protestants by the way, and arrived in the latter city
on the 1st of the Fourth Month. They found that the school had increased
in numbers, and the scholars had made good progress.


On entering the school-room, says J.Y., the girls all flocked to us, their
black eyes sparkling with joy, while they clung round us with their little
arms to be embraced. The harmony and peaceful feelings which pervade the
family are truly comforting to our hearts.


In taking a retrospect of what they had done up to this time, they write
thus to their Friends in England:--


The manner in which our gracious Lord has condescended to open the way for
a portion of labor in this part of his vineyard, adds a grain to our
faith: the service which has hitherto fallen to our lot on this journey is
of that nature towards which we had a view before we left our native land;
and we are bound gratefully to acknowledge, amid many conflicts and
discouragements, that sweet peace is sometimes our portion. But our dear
friends in England will readily conceive that our baptisms are various and
deep, during our separation from the bosom of our own little visible
church; and we hope to retain a place in their sympathy and prayers, when
they are favored with access to the throne of mercy. Our love flows freely
and unceasingly to all our dear friends, from whom it is always comforting
to hear. Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course and be glorified.


On the 18th of the Fourth Month they again left Nismes, and commenced
their journey towards Switzerland, accompanied, as before, by Jules
Paradon. On their way to Grenoble, they had opportunities of spreading
many copies of the _Scripture Extracts_, which they had with them,
among the Roman Catholics; and they had also some interesting conversation
with individuals of that profession.


At Tullins, they write, the eagerness to receive books was so great, that
a crowd soon assembled around us, and we found it difficult to satisfy
them; again, at the moment of our departure, they pressed round our
carriage, and we could hardly separate ourselves from them.

On the 22nd (to continue their own narrative) we arrived at Grenoble, with
a view to spend First-day there. A letter from one of our acquaintances at
Nismes to Pastor Bonifas procured us a kind reception, and he invited us
to spend First-day evening at his house, where a meeting was to be held.
We did not, however, feel quite at liberty to attend, as we found the
regular church-service would be performed. The next day we received
another invitation from the Pastor to a meeting where only the Scriptures
would be read. We thought it best to accept it, and by going a little
before the time proposed, we had a very interesting conversation with the
Pastor, his wife, and a young Englishwoman, on our peculiar views. The
meeting was an assembly of various classes, with a preponderance of young
persons, and was a very interesting occasion: many of the young people
were deeply affected. In the morning of this day we had been to see an
aged Catholic woman of the Jansenist persuasion: she appeared to have no
dependence but on her Saviour, and, full of faith and love, to have her
conversation in heaven; she gave us a sweet benediction at parting.


They left Grenoble on the 25th, and pursued their way by Chambery to
Geneva, taking care to dispose of most of their French tracts by the way,
lest they should be stopped at the Savoy custom-house. They arrived in the
city of Calvin on the 27th.

Here, as on former occasions, they found much to interest them. Several of
the ministers and professors whom they had known before, seemed to have
become more spiritually-minded; and with the flock of the deceased Pastor
Monnie, in particular, "of precious memory," they were united in near
Christian fellowship.


It seems to us, they write, that the feeling is spreading of the necessity
of the immediate guidance of the Holy Spirit; and we believe that this
view of the gospel, with that of the universality of divine love, is much
more calculated to win upon unbelievers, and to enlighten Romanists, than
the high Calvinistic doctrines which have so generally prevailed, and
which impede the growth of Christian humility and daily dependence on
divine help.

At our little meeting on First-day morning, we had the company of a widow
and her daughter. The former is like a mother to those around her who are
seeking spiritual things, and we were much comforted together. She invited
us to tea, and to have a meeting in her house the next evening: a
considerable number were collected, among whom were a pastor, several
professors, and many females. The pastor read a chapter; and when, after a
time of silence, the way opened for communication, it was like casting
seed into prepared ground, and the retirement of spirit before the Lord
which we recommended seemed really to be experienced before we separated;
it was a silence to be felt better than expressed.


Amongst other pious persons in this city, they had an introduction to the
Countess de Sellon.


She received us, says J.Y., with open heart, saying, "I am fond of the
principles of your Society, believing they have the real substance of
religion, stripped of its forms." She asked us many questions, and we felt
sweet unity with her.


On the 3rd of the Fifth Month they went to Lausanne, where they renewed
their friendship with Professor Gaudin, and had interviews with several
other seeking persons.


We were, they say, most interested by a pious magistrate, Frossard de
Saugy, near relative to a dear friend of ours at Geneva. He inquired
respecting the education of children, of whom he has many--by what means
he could make them sensible of vital religion. We replied that all we
could do was to represent to them the love and mercy of our blessed
Redeemer, and recommend them to cherish the convictions of his Holy
Spirit, which are very early bestowed upon us all: he entirely united in
our views.


From Lausanne they went to Yverdun, and the day after to Neufchatel. Since
their last visit in 1834, some who were very dear to them had been
summoned to eternal rest, which cast a shade of natural sorrow over their
entrance into the place: and they were called upon, in addition, deeply to
sympathise with some of those who remained.


The family of Professor Petavel has sustained a great loss in the death of
his eldest son, accompanied, by circumstances peculiarly striking. This
young man was about nineteen years of age. He had been very serious for
some time before his illness, and wished much to be employed as a
missionary. Early instructed by his mother in the importance of seeking
divine influence, his mind was prepared to receive the baptism of the Holy
Spirit; and he had a deep conflict to pass through, which he confided to
his mother, and which he seemed to think was the presage to suffering. In
performing some gymnastic exercises he received a fall on the head, which
after some time was followed by a paralytic affection of the whole body,
so that he became entirely helpless, and his speech was taken away. It was
only his tender mother who could ascertain his wants and administer to
them, which she did with unceasing assiduity. After about six months his
speech was almost miraculously restored, and he used it in praising the
Lord for the remarkable support and consolation of his Spirit. He said he
had been sensible of all that had passed, and that he had been abundantly
confirmed in the belief that true religion consists in hearing the voice
of our blessed Redeemer, and seeking to do his will. After some time the
capability of speaking much again forsook him; yet he lingered some months
longer, and when M.Y. beheld him soon after our arrival, he appeared like
a precious lamb purified, and waiting to be gathered to the everlasting
fold. The resignation of his parents was truly edifying: they proposed
that we should both come the next day, and sit quietly beside him for a
while. This proved a deeply impressive time; the presence of the Great
Shepherd was evidently with us, and called forth thanksgiving for the
mercies received and the deliverance anticipated. While listening to a few
words addressed to him at parting, he fixed his dying eyes upon us with an
expression not to be forgotten, and before midnight the precious spirit
was received into the arms of its Saviour. As we left for Locle early in
the morning, we did not hear of this until our return the day following.


Their visit to their favorite orphan-institution was, as ever, very
interesting. They thus describe the state in which they found it:--


Our dear German friend M. Zimmerlin, the associate of dear M. A. Calame,
still lives: she received us with overflowing affection. After tea, which
we took there, she hastened to show us the improvements in the premises,
which, she said, our kind friends in England had contributed to procure by
their donations through us. The institution appears to be now in excellent
order. In the evening, the children, 138 in number, were collected with
the mistresses and family, and we had a very satisfactory opportunity with
them. The same precious influence seems to prevail which we have noticed
heretofore.


They returned to Neufchatel the next evening, where they heard that the
remains of Paul Petavel were to be interred the next day.


His father, they add, was desirous that the meeting we intended to hold
with our friends should be held at his house that evening. When M.Y. went
to see the family, she found the parents fall of gratitude and praise. The
funeral was attended by the students from the college, and a large number
of others; for the professor is much beloved, and the affecting situation
of his son has been a lesson of instruction to the young people who used
to associate with him, and seems to have had an effect on the whole town.
The evening of this day proved to be a memorable time: a considerable
number were collected, among whom were several pastors and a number of
young persons. I seldom, says J.Y., remember to have attended a more
solemn occasion. The Saviour's presence was near, to console and instruct.
After my M.Y. and I had relieved our minds in testimony and supplication,
the professor and the other pastors spoke with much feeling; I think it
was evident they were constrained by the Spirit. We parted (to resume the
words of their joint epistle) from the family under a strong conviction of
the support and consolation which those experience who depend in living
faith upon their blessed Redeemer.


From Neufchatel, John and Martha Yeardley went to Berne, where they
renewed the bond of friendship with those to whose spiritual state they
had ministered in former years. With these they united several times in
worship and in social religious intercourse. At the close of one of these
meetings, the lady of the house, an active and benevolent character,
acknowledged, that she was sensible of the truth of what they had heard,
and believed that in the present day the Lord was leading many of his
devoted children to listen to his voice, that they might be brought more
under the teachings of his Spirit, and from this would flow their
consolation. "This (they observe) is the more remarkable, as, when we were
here before, she held views on election and the _finished_ work of
grace, almost to the exclusion of the work of 'regeneration and the
renewing of the Holy Ghost.'"


We find in some here, writes John Yeardley in his Diary, a desire for food
of a more spiritual nature: they really enjoy waiting on the Lord in
silence; but the customary activity is strong, and not easily broken
through. I trust the day will come when silence will more prevail in the
assemblies of the people. We left Berne with feelings of peace and of much
affection for many in that place, and thankful to our Heavenly Father, in
that he had prepared the hearts of his people to receive the invitation to
feed on that spiritual food which alone can nourish the soul to eternal
life.


They arrived at Basle on the 17th. Since they had visited this city in
1834, Hoffmann, the director of the institution at Kornthal, had succeeded
Blumhardt in the superintendence of the Mission-house. He received them
with his usual kindness, and one evening they supped with the students,
and had a religious meeting with them. They spent another evening with a
pious family, where several missionaries and pastors were present. In
speaking of this occasion, John and Martha Yeardley were led into a
reflection which deserves to be pondered by Christians of every name.


Before separating, they say, the Scriptures were read, and some of the
missionaries spoke on the importance of uniting in desire for a more
general outpouring of the Spirit: J.Y. also spoke much to the same effect.
It was, we trust, a profitable season; but the reflection arose on this
occasion, as it has done on some others when among serious persons not of
our profession, that if they would but suffer the degree of divine
influence mercifully afforded thoroughly to baptize the heart with the
true baptism, much creaturely activity would be done away, and the light
of the gospel would shine in them and through them in much greater purity.

We paid and received visits, they continue, from some of the
_Interieurs_ whom we had known before, and had to lament something of
a visionary spirit in the midst of right feeling. We recommended
simplicity, and close attention to the Scriptures and to the Shepherd's
voice.


One day John Yeardley went into the mountains to see an establishment
called the Pilgrim Mission Institution, where he was interested in meeting
three young men from Syria, who had come there to escape the scenes of war
in their own country, and with the desire to be rendered capable of
instructing their countrymen.

They left Basle on the 22nd, and entered Germany. They were, for a time, a
good deal embarrassed with the change of language from French to German,
having had little or no occasion to use the latter tongue during their
journey. They stopped at Carlsruhe, where they called, with an
introduction, on the Princess of Wuertemberg.


She received us, they say, very kindly, and we had a satisfactory
interview with her, and also with an interesting female who has the charge
of her children. After much conversation with the princess in French, she
introduced us to her three lovely children, and asked J.Y. to give them a
word of exhortation. We remained silent awhile, and, under a precious
feeling, offered prayer for the divine blessing on this family and all its
branches; after which the word of sympathy and exhortation flowed freely.
At parting, the princess took a cordial leave of us, and said she received
our visit as a blessing from the Lord.


The next day they pursued their way towards Pyrmont. Being weary with
travelling, and their horses also needing rest, they tarried two days at
Frankfort. Here they saw their old friend Von Meyer; and spent much of
their time in the company of Dr. Pinkerton. "I was instructed," says J.Y.,
"with seeing the charity and Christian meekness in which he daily lives."

On the 3rd of the Sixth Month they reached Pyrmont, where they remained a
few weeks. They attended on the 2nd of the Seventh Month the Two-months'
Meeting, at Minden. Many peasants were present in the meeting for worship,
and on John and Martha Yeardley's return to Pyrmont, some of them came to
the meeting there on First-day, and begged the Friends to go to Vlotho to
meet a company of their brethren. They gave the peasants liberty to call a
meeting at that place for Third-day, the 18th.

On Second-day, as they were setting off, an accident happened to John
Yeardley.


He had left the horse's head, writes M.Y., to attend to placing the
baggage, when, hearing another carriage drive rapidly up, our horse set
off, and my J.Y., in attempting to stop him by catching hold of the reins,
fell, and was much bruised, but through mercy no limb was broken. We
applied what means were in our power, and I urged our remaining at
Pyrmont, and sending to defer the meeting; but he would go on to Lemgo.
His whole frame was much shaken, and we passed a sleepless night, so that
the meeting next day was not a little formidable. It proved a much longer
journey to Vlotho than we had expected; when we arrived we found a large
number assembled. Five of our Friends came from Minden to meet us, and it
was a remarkable meeting, notwithstanding we had gone to it under so much
discouragement: we have cause to bless and adore our Divine Master, who
caused his presence to be felt amongst us. August Mundhenck interpreted
for J.Y. and for me. J.R. also suffered his voice to be acceptably heard
in testimony, after which the meeting closed in solemn supplication. We
pursued our way that night to Bielefeld and the next day towards the
Rhine.


On their way home they stopped at Duesseldorf. The ten years which had gone
by since they had visited the Orphan Asylum at Duesselthal, near this town,
had wrought a great change in the physical condition of Count Von der
Recke. He looked worn and ill, the effect of care and anxiety for his
numerous adopted family; but he evinced a spirit of pious resignation, and
had a hearty welcome ready for his visitors. They returned to England
through Belgium, and arrived in London on the 8th of the Eighth Month.

They did not at once return to their home at Scarborough, but spent a
month in Hertford, Oxford and Buckinghamshire, attending the meetings of
Friends in these counties, and visiting that of Berkhamstead several
times.




CHAPTER XVI.


REMOVAL TO STAMFORD-HILL, AND COMMENCEMENT OF THE FIFTH CONTINENTAL
JOURNEY.

1843-48.

The tour which John and Martha Yeardley made in and around
Buckinghamshire, and which is mentioned at the conclusion of the last
chapter, was undertaken in quest of a new place of abode. In a letter from
Martha Yeardley to her sister, Mary Tylor, written on the 3rd of the
Eleventh Month, she says:--

Thou art aware that we have thought, if way should open of going nearer to
you, and of pitching our tent within the Quarterly Meeting of
Buckinghamstead. We offered to purchase a cottage at Berkhamstead, but for
the present that has quite fallen through: we therefore intend to rest
quietly here for the winter, in hopes that in the spring or summer
something may offer, either at B. or in that quarter, to which we feel
attracted; yet desiring to commit this and all that concerns us into the
all-directing hand of our great Lord and Master, who has a right to do
with us what seemeth him good.


Not long afterwards they purchased a house at Berkhamstead, called Gossom
Lodge, to which they removed in the Fourth Month, 1844.

Very soon after they had taken possession of their new dwelling, they made
a circuit through the meetings of Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire,
holding a few public meetings by the way: and the next summer they
undertook a more extensive religious visit--viz., to the six northern
counties of England.

In the course of the same year we find them meditating a further removal,
into the immediate vicinity of London. One of the few entries in his Diary
which were made by John Yeardley during this period, speaks of the
apprehension of duty under which they contemplated this change: it was
written after their removal.


For some years past I have often thought the time might come when we might
see it right to settle within Stoke Newington Meeting. This feeling now
began (1845) to fasten more strongly on our minds than it had done before,
and we thought it right to make an effort to let Gossom Lodge, and seek a
residence at Stamford Hill; and we have reason to believe that in this
important step our prayer has been answered, and that all our
deliberations have been guided by that wisdom which is from above. Very
strong is my conviction that our Heavenly Father is not unmindful of the
outward circumstances of those who seek his counsel, and desire to act
under the guidance of his Holy Spirit. We were favored to let our house at
Berkhamstead without trouble; the very first person to whom we made it
known took it off our hands: and with equal ease we found another dwelling
at Stamford Hill, which I consider as a proof that our prayer was heard
and answered in this serious step: the signs I had asked were granted.


They removed to Stamford Hill on the 2nd of the Twelfth Month, 1845. As
soon as they had settled in, John Yeardley became seriously indisposed
with his old complaint, which ended in the jaundice. In the course of the
spring and summer of 1846 he repaired with M.Y. to Bath, and afterwards
to Harrowgate, to seek a restoration of his health.


The waters of the last-named place proved, he says, very efficacious both
to my beloved M.Y. and myself. My precious dear, he continues, suffered
much in her health through the fatigue of nursing me during the winter.
How my soul overflows with gratitude to my Heavenly Father that he has
united me to such a partner, who takes more than a full share in all my
sorrows; and, thanks be unto our God, we have often to rejoice also
together in Him!


On their return from Harrowgate they visited many of the meetings in
London and the vicinity,--a service which they had always had in view, in
looking towards a residence at Stamford Hill; and from the Eleventh Month,
1846, to the First Month, 1847, they were occupied in a religious visit to
the families of the members and attenders of Gracechurch-street Monthly
Meeting, in which their service was very acceptable.


The friends appointed to arrange the visits, says J.Y., have done so with
willingness and efficiency, and we have, I believe, the help of their
spirits. In passing from house to house, we are made sensible of our
inability to render aid to others unassisted by the Spirit of our Divine
Master. Wherever we have gone we have been received with kindness and
Christian cordiality; and in thus being permitted to mingle our feelings
with those who are bound up with us in religious profession, we feel sweet
peace and comfort, and our hearts are filled with thankfulness to the
Lord, that he has enabled us to do that which we believe he put in our
hearts.


They returned the minute which had been granted them for this service on
the 6th of the First Month. Many who read this Memoir will remember how
the tidings of the death of Joseph John Gurney, who suddenly expired on
the 5th, spread through the Society, and produced wherever it came an
impression of sorrowful but heavenly solemnity. The event is referred to
in the notice of this meeting which is contained in the Diary.


The meeting for worship was particularly solemn. The spirit of our dear
departed friend J.J.G. seemed present with us. The event had impressed our
minds with the awful uncertainty of time. My dear M.Y. ministered to our
comfort, and so did dear ----. I was constrained, under a sense that the
Lord had withdrawn many laborers from his vineyard, to lift up a prayer
for the remnant that is left, to crave prosperity for the blessed work of
grace in the hearts of all present, and to ask for more devotedness to the
Lord's cause.


The next day they received intelligence of the decease of one of their
Scarborough friends, whose dying words are worthy to be preserved in
lasting remembrance.


1 _mo_. 7.--On returning from meeting we found a letter informing us
of the sudden decease of Isaac Stickney of Scarborough. When the doctor
attempted to give him brandy in his sinking state, he said, Doctor, don't
cloud my intellect; if this be dying, I die in the arms of Jesus. These
last words of my beloved and long-known friend are sweetly consoling to my
spirit.


In the Second Month of 1848, John Yeardley again prepared to go forth and
preach the Gospel in several countries on the Continent of Europe. He was
accompanied by his beloved wife, partly in the character of a
fellow-laborer, constrained by the force of Christian love to the same
field of service, and partly as his companion and helper in countries
where she did not otherwise feel herself called to labor. The course of
their anticipated travel is described in the following extract from the
Diary. They were unable, as it proved, to obtain admission into the
Russian Empire; and this part of the mission was accomplished by John
Yeardley alone, and at a later period.


1848. 2 _mo_. 8.--At our Monthly Meeting at Gracechurch street, I
proposed my concern to visit some parts of South Russia, particularly the
German colonies; also some places in the Prussian and Austrian dominions,
parts of Switzerland and France, particularly Ardeche, and a few places in
Belgium, and to revisit parts of Germany. My precious M.Y. also was
constrained in gospel love to tell her friends that she had long thought
of a visit to France and Belgium; and, if health permitted, should think
it her religious duty to accompany me to South Russia. We had the full
unity of our friends, who expressed much sympathy and encouragement, to
our great comfort. It is about twenty years since I first thought
seriously that I might have to visit the Crimea, and for thirty years I
have had a prospect of some parts of Bohemia. Truly the vision has been
for an appointed time; and if the period be now come, I trust it is the
Lord's time, and that his presence may go with us. Many have been the
conflicts and deep the baptisms through which I have passed, before coming
to a willingness to offer to do what I believe to be the will of my
Divine Master. Feeble as are my powers, I desire they may be devoted to
his cause for the remainder of my days; and I do esteem it a great mercy
to have arrived at a clear pointing in this important prospect. May the
blessing of preservation rest upon the beloved partner of my sorrows and
my joys, and on myself; and may He whom we desire to serve heal all our
maladies of body and mind!


While their attention was thus turned to foreign lands, a storm was
gathering in France which in the course of this month burst upon Europe
with extraordinary violence, and overturned or endangered half the thrones
on the Continent. This convulsed state of the European nations rendered it
needful for them to wait a few months before they commenced their
undertaking. In the Seventh Month, John Yeardley speaks of having obtained
the further concurrence of the church, and of the feelings which the
immediate prospect of the journey awakened in his mind.


7 _mo_. 1.--At the Quarterly Meeting, and also at the Yearly Meeting
of Ministers and Elders, our friends entered very fully into our proposed
visit to the Continent. The expression of sympathy and full unity was
abundant; there was a strong evidence of the good presence of the Lord
being near during the deliberations, which proved a strength and comfort
to myself and my beloved partner. The needful certificates are now all in
our possession, and are expressed in terms the most appropriate and
encouraging. My mind is deeply humbled at the near approach of our
departure, in the present state of affairs on the continent of Europe: but
I feel a confiding hope in the divine power for protection and safe
guidance. May the Lord Almighty give us strength and resignation to commit
our lives into his hand, and to say, Thy will be done. Amen!


This series of travels was the last in which John and Martha Yeardley were
to be engaged as joint-laborers in their Lord's work. The health of the
latter had been for several years seriously affected; and although she
continued to take a deep interest in the spiritual condition of the
countries they had visited before, and was enabled to the end to afford
her husband the assistance of her strong sympathy and of her religious
exercise of mind, the fatigue of constant travelling told more and more
upon her enfeebled frame, and she did not long survive the accomplishment
of this journey. John Yeardley, less advanced in years, and possessing a
hardy constitution, had not yet lost the fire of his earlier days. The
same spring and impulse was still strong within him which had animated him
in former journeys, and which those who knew him in middle life will not
fail to remember. Some of these will have before them the mental image of
his person and manner--the fixed resolution, the concentrated mind, the
ardent and devoted spirit, which shone through his impressive countenance
and his whole figure, when he was engaged in his Lord's work; and perhaps
also they may call to mind the very words of faithful counsel, or of
encouragement, drawn from the well-spring of gospel sympathy, which fell
from his lips.

John and Martha Yeardley did not accomplish the extensive mission which
now lay before them at one stroke, but in three stages, returning to
England between each. The most prominent object in the first journey was
Belgium; in the second, the Rhine country; in the third, they were called
to sow seeds of Christian doctrine in lands lying beyond the limit of any
former travel--viz., in Silesia and Bohemia.

This was the first time that the Roman Catholic country of Belgium had
called forth the exercise of their Christian charity. They left London in
the Seventh Month, and spent about three weeks in travelling through the
country, resting chiefly at Ghent, Brussels, Charleroi and Spa. They were
accompanied as far as Brussels by Robert and Christine Alsop, and through
the whole journey, by an ingenuous young man whom they had engaged to
assist them, named Adolphe Rochedieu. The religious opening which awaited
them at Brussels was very encouraging; few incidents which arose in the
course of their numerous journeys were of a more animating character than
the acquaintance which they made with the pastor Van Maasdyk and some of
his flock. We give the narrative from J.Y.'s Diary and letters.


7 _mo_. 19.--H. Van Maasdyk paid us a long visit this morning. He was
educated in a convent in Belgium, and becoming a priest, he exercised the
functions which devolved upon him with much credit to himself, and to the
satisfaction of his superiors, until the year 1836. He possessed a Bible
in Latin, which he never read. He had the cure of a large parish, in
which, down to the year above mentioned, there was not a single copy of
the Scriptures in the Flemish tongue. About that time the colporteurs
introduced the New Testament in Flemish, and some copies of the Bible,
which greatly excited the priests, and in particular the bishop, who said
the translation was mutilated and falsified, and commanded that the
members of the Catholic Church who had received copies, should either burn
them themselves, or bring them to the cures for that purpose. Van
Maasdyk's parishioners accordingly brought their Bibles and Testaments
(five copies) to him to be burned. He was zealous in the Romish faith, and
had preached violently against the distributors of the wicked books, as
they were called; and he was about to fulfil the command to burn them,
when suddenly he felt something in his heart which restrained him, and he
thought, I will at least first examine the foundation of the bishop's
charges. He took up his Latin Bible, and placing beside it the copy in
Flemish, began with the charge of mutilation. He found it not at all
abridged. He then went to the charge of falsification, and found the two
copies to agree with slight variations here and there; in fact, the modern
translation proved to have been made from the Vulgate, which was the one
in his possession. He read the denunciation of our Saviour, "Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites," and it struck him forcibly; he felt
that he must say, "Woe is me, I am one of those who deceive the people."
He read again, "There is one Mediator between God and man;" and here again
his conscience smote him: "Woe is me, I teach the people in their
confessions that the saints make intercession." His sorrow was so deep,
that he thought he could die a thousand deaths rather than continue a
Romish priest.

Now his persecution began. He was beloved by his flock, who entreated him
not to leave them. After much conflict of mind, he wrote a decided letter
to his bishop, who in the end gave him his dismissal. Still feeling
himself called to proclaim the Gospel, he began to assemble the people in
little companies, and to instruct them in the Scriptures. At the entreaty
of his friends he settled at Brussels, where there was a wide field for
labor amongst the poorest of the Roman Catholics, who speak only Flemish.
His congregation consisted at first of some fifteen or twenty persons; but
such was the success he met with, that they have been obliged four or five
times in succession to seek a larger building, and his congregation now
consists of 500. He is said to be one of the most powerful preachers in
the Flemish language. It is delightful to be in his company; his heart is
filled with gratitude, and his eyes sparkle with joy, when he is with
those who love the Saviour. Nothing is paid him by his congregation; he
has a little property of his own, and sometimes receives a little help
from the Adolphus Society.

After a long conversation with him on the spiritual nature of worship, he
took us to see some of his flock, with whom we had family sittings from
house to house. This is exactly the class our hearts longed to visit;
thanks be to our Heavenly Father who has thus opened our way.

20_th_.--The meeting at Pastor Marzial's last evening was much larger
than we had expected. Van Maasdyk came in unexpectedly after the service
which had been held at his dwelling, and with him a part of his flock.
Many of the company were those who had renounced Romanism; some of the
young men interested us exceedingly. I had a deal of conversation with
them as to their religious experience. There were several young Germans
among them, who are residing in Brussels; with these I conversed in their
own language, which was highly gratifying to them. As Pastor Marzial
speaks English well, I clung to him in the hope of having him for an
interpreter; but he encouraged me to speak as well as I could in French,
as the natives like it much better, and consider it a compliment to their
language. This made me very low, it being a company of well-educated
persons, and I asked Van Maasdyk what I should do. I would rather, he
replied, hear ten words from your own mouth, than ten thousand through the
mouth of another; we shall understand you, and what comes from the heart
goes to the heart. This settled the question; I gave myself up to the
language, and was helped through. My M.Y. was favored in her
communication. After a short address from M., I concluded the meeting with
supplication, also in French. I do believe the Spirit was poured upon us
from on high; many hearts were touched, and tears flowed freely from many
eyes.

The Lord has indeed opened a wide door for us in this place; the dear
people follow us from meeting to meeting, entreating us for an opportunity
of the like kind in their own houses; but we must be watchful to see our
own way. However, if the oil is staid, it is not for want of vessels, for
what we have to communicate seems like seed cast into the prepared ground.
May the Lord himself be their teacher, and carry on his own work; for it
is most assuredly his. To those who are spiritually minded, to hear of a
society holding spiritual views, is like marrow to their bones. It is not
so much what we are able to say to them, but our being as living witnesses
to the truth which these awakened people feel in their own hearts.

21_st_.--Attended a meeting of Van Maasdyk's in the poorer district
of Brussels; about seventy to eighty persons present, consisting of
converted Romanists, seeking Protestants, and two awakened Jews. Two of
the company were blind men, very pious, who gain their living by selling
matches. Our friend read, explained, and applied the tenth chapter of
John, in Flemish; he also interpreted for me a few words, which I spoke in
German.


On their way to Charleroi, after passing through Mons, they traversed the
great Belgium iron and coal country, where the people speak a patois but
understand French. Here they made a free distribution of the religious
tracts they had taken with them, and found an able co-adjutor in their
postillion. When he understood what their object was, he allowed few
opportunities to pass by without putting these little messengers into the
hands of his fellow-countrymen.

At Charleroi, where they arrived on the 22d, they enjoyed Christian
association of the most interesting kind, especially with Pastors Poinsot
and Jaccard, and with Marzial, who followed them from Brussels. They seem
to have found much more of the life of religion among the newly-awakened
in Belgium than they had expected.


We have, says J.Y., good reason to believe that the burden we have so long
felt for the inhabitants in some parts of Belgium was laid upon us by our
Divine Master, who is now pleased to make way for us to throw it off;
thanks be to his great name.


From Charleroi they went by Liege to Spa, where they procured a lodging in
order to enjoy a period of needful rest. The tracts they gave away on the
road were received with eagerness. Adolphe handed them out freely right
and left, and when any one hesitated to take them, a significant nod from
the postillion never failed to secure a ready reception.


The country from Namur to Liege, writes John Yeardley, and particularly
from Liege to Spa, is beautiful, the road running along the banks of the
Meuse, amid wooded rocks. These are the works of my Heavenly Father, but I
sigh after the workmanship of his hands, created after his own image.


Passing over several incidents of religious intercourse and labor, we
select a circumstance which illustrates the state of the country, and of
their own feelings in relation to it.

Under date of Spa, the 2nd of the Eighth Month, John Yeardley says:--


My M.Y. made acquaintance with an interesting young woman in a shop, and
gave her some of the _Scripture Extracts_. She came to us last
evening, and remained some time conversing on the Romish religion. She had
never seen the Bible. When we asked her what was the nature of the mass,
she said she did not understand it, but she attended it because others
did. We gave her the Bible used by ourselves, having no other at our
disposal. Her eyes sparkled with joy at the newly-acquired treasure. Her
heart is touched by the Spirit of God, and I humbly hope her eyes will be
enlightened to seek for strength independently of her blind guides. I
never saw and felt more sensibly the awful account the priests will have
to give for thus deceiving the people in the things which belong to their
salvation.


On the 3rd they quitted Belgium, and proceeded to Bonn. Here they had the
pleasure of meeting their old friend, Charles Majors, formerly of
Strasburg. In a walk which they took with him, they renewed the sweet
intercourse of former days.


8 _mo_. 5.--We took a walk with Majors and his family to the top of
"Mount Calvary," and mounted a steep hill pitched with sharp stones, on
which the poor Romanists go barefooted, repeating prayers at each station,
supposed to be as many as the times when our Lord rested when bearing his
cross from the gate of Jerusalem to Mount Calvary. Having descended, we
sat down at the foot of a cross, and spoke of Him who bore our sins on the
cross in his own body. A desire was felt and expressed that the little
company might ever dwell near to Him who died on the cross.


At Mannheim, John Yeardley writes:--


I took a walk in the public gardens, opposite the Hotel de l'Europe, where
we lodge. All very quiet without, and I felt peaceful within myself,
reading a chapter and sitting alone. The Spirit of my Divine Master was
near, and I felt assured that there was something in this place with which
we could unite.


They found here a little company, who met together without any regular
pastor.


"They gave us", says John Yeardley, "a cordial reception, and their
countenances indicated that they had been with Jesus; and, although
scattered as sheep among wolves, they appeared to belong to the fold of
the true Shepherd. After a few family calls, we were conducted to the
house of a pious widow, where the meetings were usually held. As we were
in haste, these Christian people kindly appointed a meeting for worship,
to be held the same evening, to receive our visit, which, through divine
mercy, proved like a refreshing brook by the way: the Saviour's presence
being over us, his doctrine dropped like dew on the thirsty ground."[9]


At Strasburg they found Pastor Ehrmann, and several other pious persons
whom they had known in 1833, with whom and with some others they had much
conversation on religious subjects, and were called upon to explain the
views held by Friends, particularly on marriage, education, and the care
of the poor.


"Before parting", says John Yeardley, M. Passavant asked for silence, and
we had a sweet time of religious communion, in which consolation and
encouragement were offered, and thanks rendered for the favor of being
permitted to meet together, and for the favor of the Divine Presence.


Basle was their next halting-place. A letter written by Martha Yeardley
from this city, contains some notice of the social and religious life by
which their tarriance in foreign cities was characterised, and of her own
peculiar position as a gospel minister.


The pious Spittler, she says, has just been with us; he is still full of
faith and good works. M.L., whom we knew as a nice girl at Corfu, is
married to a serious merchant of this place; a sister of C. Majors' wife
at Bonn, with her husband, also resides here; and we have fixed to take
tea with them and some of their friends to-morrow evening. My J.Y. is gone
with a converted Jew, Spittler, and one who has been a missionary to
Jerusalem, to a lecture this afternoon, where it is probable he may have
an opportunity of speaking to those assembled. As it is to be all German,
I excused myself in order to rest and continue my letter. I have deeply
felt on this journey, as on others, that it is difficult for females to
make their way as gospel ministers; we have always found it tolerated, but
I am always sensible of a prejudice against it. On some occasions my J.Y.
has explained our views on this important subject.

15_th_.--Yesterday we went to see a remarkably interesting
institution for missionaries, on the top of a high mountain, called
Chrischona Berg. It was established by Spittler, and, is well worth the
trouble of a little fatigue in getting to it. Twelve young men of the
poorer class, who have offered themselves from a sense of duty to become
missionaries, are there taught various languages, and retained until some
field of labor opens for them to which they feel bound. It is also a
working institution; they are taught various trades, in order that when
they go out they may earn their living. After viewing the premises and
hearing a lesson in Arabic, we saw the pupils assembled in the schoolroom.
Instead of a hymn in English, which they had learned, we asked for a
little silence, which was felt to be precious. My J.Y. then addressed them
in German, and was much helped. The superintendent, a very interesting
man, was in England for some time; and in consequence of a hurt received
on the head in Malta, was sent to the _Retreat_ at York, where he
became acquainted with several Friends, Samuel Tuke in particular. Under
the gentle treatment there he recovered, but he lost his wife and one
child at York, and has left two others in England. I felt much for him,
and ventured to offer him a little consolation, and also to express my
interest for the institution, which Spittler desired him to repeat in
German.--(_Letter to Mary Tylor_, 8 _mo_. 13.)


Whilst at Basle they visited Pastor Lindel, an old friend of theirs. He
related to them that he had been some time before applied to, to join the
Evangelical Alliance. "I told them," he said, "we have got further than
you have. In looking over your rules, I observe there is a class of
Christians in England whom you exclude; and we can receive them. Our bond
of union extends much beyond yours; it embraces, without any distinction,
all who love the Lord Jesus Christ."

From Basle they went to Berne and Neufchatel. Their visit to these
favorite spots was, as at former times, accompanied by a good measure of
the blessing of the gospel of Christ.


18_th_. _Berne_.--Many of our former friends having heard of our
arrival, came this morning to our inn; and having called together a few
other serious persons, we had a precious meeting. They have suffered much
since our last visit; our hearts were dipped into sympathy for them, and
our tears were mingled together. The Lord's presence was over us, and he
caused the word of consolation, exhortation, and supplication to flow
freely. Some precious souls whom we have known in this place have been
taken to their rest since we last saw them. Soon shall we also be inquired
after and not found! Lord, grant that we may be prepared to meet thee at
thy coming!

20_th. Neufchatel, First-day_.--The meeting was held in a saloon at
our hotel, (_Des Alpes_). The room was quite crowded; we were
surprised to see them continue to come in, by twos and threes together, at
so short a notice. The unhallowed thought arose, Where shall we find bread
to feed this multitude? But, thanks to Him who is the Bread of Life, he
dispensed food to the refreshing of our souls. My M.Y. supplicated for us,
and the gospel-word flowed freely: the meeting closed with thanksgiving by
me.


Sad reflections on the political and religious state of the country
oppressed their minds while travelling through Switzerland.


21_st_.--In all the times we have visited Neufchatel, I never saw it
look more beautiful. But the place was dull, and a depressed feeling
manifested the life of religion to be wanting. Switzerland has suffered
through the recent changes in the governments: infidelity is sorrowfully
increasing. An abundant harvest has been gathered into the barns, and
Nature everywhere smiles on ungrateful man. Woe to the nations when the
ungodly bear rule! Persecution still rages in the Canton de Vaud.


Speaking of the great advantage which an acquaintance with the French and
German languages afforded them, John Yeardley observes:--


How I long that some of our dear young friends in England might give up
their minds and a portion of their time to the acquisition of these
languages--and, above all, give up their hearts to be prepared for the
Lord's work! How wide is the field of labor!


From Neufchatel they proceeded to Geneva, and thence to Grenoble. Here
they were received in the most open-hearted manner by the Protestant
minister, Amand; but their feelings were severely tried by the martial
display which the city presented.


26_th._--On arriving at Grenoble, we inquired the name of the
Protestant minister, and called on him without loss of time. So soon as he
understood the object of our journey, he offered us his chapel for a
meeting; or, if it would be more agreeable to us, he would convoke a
meeting in the schoolroom for to-morrow evening with a number of persons
who usually meet there. We accepted the latter proposal. It is comforting
to find such a brother in the gospel; but O for the morrow! how my heart
fails me for fear! Lord, help us, and give us to trust in thee!

27_th._--This day is a day of suffering. The soldiers, the drums, the
trumpets, with the shouting and dancing of the people, is enough to sink
the heart of the reflecting Christian beyond hope, had he not a refuge in
retirement before the Lord. The whole course of the military system tends
to evil, and the corruption of manners.


The meeting was well attended, and they were thankful in being enabled to
mingle in spirit with a company of sincere and pious Christians. The
pastor called on them the next day. He had succeeded their good friend
Bonifas, spoken of in the journey of 1843. Conversing with him on points
on which Christians may differ, he observed, "The Church of Christ is like
a great house built on a rock. There are different apartments for the
various classes of Christians; but they are in the same house, and on the
same rock, Christ."

After attending to some other gospel-service at Grenoble, they resumed
their journey, held meetings in Valence and the neighborhood, and crossing
the Rhone, entered Ardeche. A meeting which they held at Privas was an
occasion of remarkable stillness and solemnity.


31_st._--There was a room filled with serious persons, who
immediately settled into silence like a Friends' meeting: indeed, I wish
our meetings in England were always times of as much good feeling. A
chapter, the second of the Acts, was read; after which I supplicated, and
my M.Y. spoke in testimony, as well as myself. M.Y. closed the opportunity
in supplication.


They held another meeting at Vals, a village in the Cevennes mountains,
near the town of Aubenas. Lindley Murray Hoag, from America, had had a
meeting there not long before. There was no resident pastor, and the
schoolmaster called on John and Martha Yeardley, and informed them that
when no one was present to preach, the congregation were accustomed to
read a sermon, the liturgy, and prayers. They explained to him their
objection to written sermons, and he appeared to be sensible of the
inconsistency of them with true gospel ministry, but alleged that the
people would not be satisfied without having the greater part of the time
occupied with "service." As they could not undertake that this should be
the case, it was agreed that they should be informed when the usual
engagements were concluded, and that the schoolmaster should give notice
of their intention to hold a religious meeting. In the morning
(First-day), unexpectedly, a young man arrived, who came to see if he
could be established in the place as pastor, and the schoolmaster
introduced him to J. and M.Y. He raised no objection to their speaking
after the service, but the sermon which he preached, as they afterwards
found, was on the politics of the day, and when it was concluded, they
were still kept waiting during a conference which the consistory had with
him. This delay, and their persuasion that the members of the consistory
were not the men to sympathise with them in their religious exercise, was
exceedingly proving to faith, and they entered the chapel under a pressure
of mind almost beyond utterance. After a pause John Yeardley rose and
spoke in French, in which he felt himself to be much helped; an influence
superior to words was spread abroad, lifting up the messengers above the
fear of man. Martha Yeardley followed, inviting the people to come under
the teaching of the Holy Spirit, through faith in Christ Jesus, and
especially addressing herself to the mothers.

They remained at Vals a week.


Our lodging, says J.Y., is situated amid scenery the most romantic:
high-planted rocks, deep glens, and purling streams. For reading and
writing we spend much time on a spacious open gallery, protected from the
penetrating rays of the sun by a roof; and in the interstices are
creepers, vines, and flowers, delightful and airy.

11_th_.--This has been a trying week. I have been low in mind and
suffered much in body, but, thanks to a merciful God, I am restored to
comparative health, and my beloved one is better. The peasants who inhabit
the mountains can only come to the town on First-days; and as they live
dispersed in places almost inaccessible, we concluded to wait over another
First-day to see some of them at Vals. We had them invited to the
schoolroom. A small number only assembled, but it was a feeling time: I
hope a few were instructed, and we were satisfied in having done what we
could.


From Vals John and Martha Yeardley proceeded to Nismes, where they had
some interesting service, both within and beyond the little Society of
their fellow-professors. The account given by J.Y. of the way in which
one of their evenings was spent may be transcribed.


15_th_.--The wife of De Hauteville came to invite us to spend the
evening with a few religious friends, who met at her house for reading the
Bible. We had known the pious young woman years before, and were most easy
to accept the invitation. The little company mostly knelt down, and waited
some time in silence; and then a young man offered a short and sweet
prayer. The fourth chapter of the Hebrews was then read, and nearly all
present offered a sentiment on the subject, in meekness and in love,
though they did not agree in their interpretation. They spoke one after
the other, until all seemed tired; looking earnestly at me, as wondering
what I would say, not having spoken on the question. At length one of the
company asked my opinion. I felt freedom at once to say I found no
difficulty in the matter; I could well understand the text, but I could
not understand their interpretation of it. This remark surprised them, and
raised an air of pleasantness on every countenance. My remarks on the
passage closed the subject, and I think they were accorded with in the
general. Stillness was then had, and myself and dear M.Y. spoke to the
company. There was a precious feeling, and we were glad in not having
missed uniting with such spirits in passing an hour or two instructively
together.


The service which remained for them to do before returning to England
consisted chiefly of religions labor amongst the Friends of Congenies and
the vicinity, and in printing and distributing a large number of tracts.
They found the Society of Friends in a drooping condition as to spiritual
things, and in going round to their little meetings, Martha Yeardley felt
it to be her last visit, and she labored to clear her conscience towards
those among whom she had long been conversant, and for whose eternal
welfare she felt deeply concerned.

They returned to London on the 20th of the Tenth Month.




CHAPTER XVII.


COMPLETION OP THE FIFTH CONTINENTAL JOURNEY.

1849-50.

The disorganized state of Germany presented a serious obstacle to John and
Martha Yeardley's resuming their labors on the Continent.


FROM JOHN YEARDLEY TO JOHN KITCHING.

Scarborough, 6 mo. 23, 1849.

We spent two days at Malton with our dear friends Ann and Esther
Priestman, in their delightful new abode on the bank of the river: we were
comforted in being at meeting with them on First-day. On Second-day we
came to Scarborough, and soon procured two rooms near our own former
residence. The sea air and exercise are beneficial to the health of my
M.Y. and myself. Scarborough is certainly a most delightful place. The
changes in the little society here are great: we miss many whom we knew
and loved when we were resident here. It feels pleasant, though mournful,
once more to mingle our sympathies with the few Friends who are left.

We sometimes sigh under the weight of our burden on account of poor
Germany, from which land the accounts continue unsatisfactory. Mannheim,
where we had such a sweet little meeting with a few pious persons last
year, is now being bombarded; also in several other parts of the Rhine the
insurrection is not yet subdued. Our friend Dr. Murray returned on
Second-day last from a tour through part of France, Belgium and the Rhine.
He told us he was obliged to return after having proceeded as far as
Mayence, as the steamers were interrupted in their course beyond that
place, south. This is the very line which we had thought to pursue; we
cannot tell how soon an alteration may suddenly take place for the better.
We must wait in patience, faith and hope.


The political horizon soon became clearer, and they resumed their journey
on the 2nd of the Eighth Month. They again passed through Belgium,
stopping at several places, and distributing a large number of religious
tracts.

On reaching Elberfeld they were received in a very cordial manner by R.
Hockelmann, and they held a satisfactory meeting in that city with a
company of serious persons, originally Roman Catholics, who had at first
followed Ronge, but afterwards separated from him. John Yeardley says of
them:


They are rejected by the Lutheran and Reformed Churches. They have adopted
the name of German Catholics to attract the Romanists to them. There is
real life of religion with some of them; perhaps with still a little
obscurity on some important points of doctrine. Light does not always
shine clearly all at once; nor is it always obeyed, so as to be received
in its fulness.

Still more interesting was a meeting they had at Muehlheim on the Ruhr,
where, it will be remembered, they found an open door for their ministry
on their first continental journey. We give the narrative in John
Yeardley's words:--


8 _mo_. 17.--On our arrival at Muehlheim we received a visit from the
three pastors resident here and in the neighborhood, along with Pastor
Bochart, from Schaffhausen, whom we had known some years before. One of
them, Schultz, immediately asked me if we were not the parties who had
held a meeting in a school-room in this place twenty-four years ago. We
entered very fully into the awakening that had taken place in this
neighborhood. The spiritual seed of Tersteegen has never died out; and
they told us of a person, Muehlenbeck, in Sarn, who represents those who
are acquainted with the interior life. The youngest minister said
directly, I will fetch him. In an hour's time he came again, accompanied
by a middle-aged man, much like a good old Friend. He recollected us
again, and spoke of our meeting. When we went to see him the next day in
the village, he took us to the house in which he had lived in 1825, and
placing me in the centre of the room said, There stood thou twenty-four
years ago, and preached the gospel in this room; there sat thy dear wife
and her friend, with the young man who interpreted for her.

They soon set about making a meeting for us, which is to be held this
evening in a large room in the house of one of the brethren. O, my
Saviour, strengthen us for this evening's work, and forsake us not in the
time of need!

18_th_.--The meeting last evening was got well over. There were two
rooms filled with men and a few women; their minds seemed sweetly centred
on the Source of good. A precious silence prevailed, and I was enabled to
address them in German from Acts xi. 23:--"When Barnabas was come to
Antioch and had seen the grace of God, he was glad and exhorted them all
that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord." The nature of
silent worship was also dwelt upon, and freedom from sin, through
repentance and faith in Christ. My M.Y. spoke a few words in German, and I
supplicated in the same language. Many hearts are prepared to receive the
doctrine of the influence and guidance of the Holy Spirit: it seemed like
marrow to their bones.

After the meeting some came to our inn, and remained till 10 o'clock. They
seemed as if they could not part from us. We spoke of our ministry,
missionary journeys, baptism and the Supper, in which we seemed to be one
in sentiment and heart. Our short tarriance here has excited curiosity to
know who and what we are, and a great desire for books; and a liberal
supply has been furnished them. Those tracts on our religious principles
are just the food many are prepared to receive.

In coming this morning from Muehlheim to Elberfeld, my heart was tendered
under a sense of the Lord's mercies. I feel poor and unworthy, but it is
impressed on my heart from day to day that my little remaining strength
and my few uncertain remaining days must be devoted to my Great Master's
cause. I am thankful that we have not through discouragement been deterred
from entering on this part of our religious service; for, after all we
have passed through on the occasion, I do believe the present time is
seasonable.--

(_Diary and Letter_)


Before leaving the neighborhood, they had a second meeting at Elberfeld,
the holding of which was endangered by the animosity which prevailed
between the different religious parties. After the place and hour were
advertized, it appeared the room would be required for a missionary
meeting. The president of the missionary society was so unfriendly to
those who associated with John and Martha Yeardley, that he not only
refused to let them have the room, but refused also to let notice be given
at his meeting of the alteration in time and place which it was needful to
make in theirs. They therefore hastily arranged their meeting for another
day, and the alteration was announced in the daily newspaper. The
disappointment proved, in the end, to be a subject for thankfulness on
their parts; for just before the hour of assembly of the missionary
society, an alarming fire broke out, and threw the whole town into
commotion; and the missionary meeting was obliged to disperse as soon as
the opening hymn had been sung.

The Friends' meeting, which took place two days afterwards, was held in
quiet. John Yeardley preached on a subject which seems to have engaged his
mind ever since he had entered the place,--viz., the Fall of Man. While in
Elberfeld he printed a tract on this subject; and in a conversation which
he and Martha Yeardley had with a doctor from Charleroi, the doctor told
them it was the very thing which was wanted, being exactly adapted to the
condition of the numerous sceptics in that part, of whom he had once been
one.

Their sojourn at Bonn, where they arrived on the 31st of the Eighth Month,
was exceedingly cordial to their religious feelings. The persons with whom
they were the most intimately united were two ladies, Alexandrine
Mackeldey and the Countess Stynum; the latter of whom had come to know the
way of salvation during a visit to England. J.Y. describes the opening for
service which they found in this city, in a letter to Josiah Forster:--


This morning, the 1st of the Ninth Month, we received an early visit from
a pious young woman, _interior_. On her entering the room we felt the
Spirit of Jesus was near. As soon as we discovered the piety of her mind,
and her sweet and open disposition, I said to her: Now, tell us who there
are in this place who are really spiritually-minded persons. She said, I
will; and instantly took the pen, and put down about six or seven names,
among which was the name of the Countess Stynum. This lady, said she, I am
sure, will be rejoiced to see you; she is too weakly to leave her house,
but I am going to her and will tell her you are here.

Our kind helper soon returned with the expression of a warm desire from
the Countess that we would remain tomorrow and hold a meeting in her
saloon in the evening, and invite any of our acquaintance, and she would
give notice to her own friends. There was so evidently a pointing of the
Great Master's finger in this matter, that we were at once constrained to
accept the invitation.

9 _mo_. 3.--A little before six o'clock last evening the Countess
sent for us to take coffee with her, to have an hour of our company before
the meeting. She gave us a hearty reception, and in such Christian
simplicity, that we soon felt at perfect ease in her company. She has a
well-informed and enlightened mind and a strong understanding, and lives,
believe, in the fear of the Lord. She asked many questions about the
religious sects in England, as to the state of real piety, their forms,
baptism, &c. Then she came to our own Society. I was in poor plight for
answering questions; however, I explained the spiritual view we took of
those subjects, and asked permission to send her books, in the reception
of which she seemed to promise herself much gratification.

Her commodious and elegant saloon was conveniently seated and pretty well
filled. Our manner of worship was quite new to every one present. We first
explained it privately to the countess, who immediately comprehended our
view; there was no wish at all shown to sing or read; a precious solemnity
prevailed, and I was enabled to speak, in German, first on the nature of
our silent worship, then on what [else] rested on my mind. The young woman
above-mentioned, A. Mackeldey, interpreted for my dear M.Y., who, I
thought, had the best service; and she did it so well and so seriously
that the right unction seemed to be preserved, and prevailed over us; and
after a supplication in German we parted under a very precious solemnity.

A.M. said afterwards that she had been instructed by what she had heard,
and was prepared to appreciate the value of silence. She observed, I think
it a marked favor of Providence that you should have come at the present
perplexing time, to comfort and confirm the faith of some in this place,
and of me in particular.


Speaking of those with whom they had intercourse in this city, John
Yeardley says:--


9 _mo_. 2.--Should it be the will of our Heavenly Father, I hope we
may be permitted to see those precious souls again, and water the seed the
Great Husbandman has deposited in their hearts. I consider such little
companies, or individuals, as a little leaven working silently in a
corrupt mass.

I never remember, he writes the next day, to have had more satisfaction in
distributing Friends' books, or having intercourse with pious persons,
than thus far on the present journey. The thinking part of the people,
under the tossing of the present moment, are really thirsting for food
more spiritual than they have hitherto received.


At Neuwied they were informed that the _Inspirirten_ whom they saw
there twenty-four years before, had, with the exception of a few families,
emigrated to America, and that those whom they visited at Berlenburg had
done the same.

From Neuwied they went to Kreuznach. This was a place to which they had no
thought of going when they left England; indeed, John Yeardley, though
passing near it on former journeys, was not aware of its existence. But
when they were at Elberfeld, a swarthy youth from Cape Town, an inmate of
the Mission-house at Barmen, mentioned to them that four of his
fellow-countrymen had been for a time at Kreuznach. On hearing this place
named, it occurred to J.Y. that it would be well for them to take it in
their way. They had good reason to believe, before they left the place,
that it was the Lord who had directed their steps thither, and that he had
prepared the hearts of some who dwelt there to receive them. John Yeardley
thus relates what occurred:--


9 _mo_. 6.--On our sending to a tailor named Ott, he could not come
to us by reason of bodily infirmity; but on paying him a visit I found him
a meek and spiritual man. He undertook to speak with some others of the
same way of thinking, to meet us in our hotel at 7 o'clock. On making it
known he found more were desirous of coming than he had expected; a number
of young people asked permission to be present, so that our commodious
saloon was pretty well filled. We read the fourth chapter of John, and
then I addressed the company with great freedom; my M.Y. also spoke in
German, and was well understood. Friend Ott said, "You may travel about,
and think your journeyings and labors will do but little good, but they
will be blest far beyond what you may expect. What you have said this
evening has gone to my heart. If we had only some one to whom we could
look in holding meetings, we should grow." He was reminded of Him, the
Head of his church, to whom we must all look. Of this he was fully aware,
but said, as they were mostly of the lower class, they had no room, and
the pastors did not encourage such meetings.

7_th_.--This morning our new-made friend accompanied us to three of
the villages, to visit several of his friends. We were pleased with the
simplicity and real Christian feeling with which, they received us. We
arranged for a meeting in one of these places for First-day afternoon, and
one with our Kreuznach friends in the evening. My poor soul can only say,
Lord, help![10]

8_th_.--Called again on J.A. Ott, and found him looking very serious.
He told me he had read farther in the books we left with him, and the more
he saw, the more conviction was brought into his mind that what they
unfolded was the truth; and that he believed it his duty thoroughly to
weigh the matter, and then speak with a few of those who united with him,
to see whether they could unite in holding a meeting after our manner, but
that it was a serious matter, and they required time to mature it. We
were quite of his mind in this respect; at the same time I believe if they
had strength to meet together it would be advantageous.

10_th_.--Yesterday we met the little company in Horweiler, a room
well filled with souls thirsting, I believe, for spiritual food. "All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord," was much dwelt upon by me. My dear
M.Y. was wonderfully helped in German. It was a precious season; the
presence of the Lord was near, uniting our hearts in him.

At 7 o'clock we had the meeting in our room. It was not so lively as the
one in the country; but we can thankfully acknowledge the Great Master was
near to help in the needful time. It was a day of great exercise of body
and mind. Our friend Ott accompanied us throughout the day's labor, and I
felt the help of his spirit.

There are several villages around Kreuznach (some of which we have
visited), where dwell a good many spiritually-minded people, who meet
together for improvement. We have just received a sweet visit from Adam
Tiegel of Schwabenheim, who is come to have a little talk with us. He
seems to be the first who was awakened in 1805, and was made the means of
awakening others, who now hold meetings in an old monastery.[11]


Passing on to Mannheim, they saw the effects of the revolution in Baden;
the fine stone bridge over the Rhine had been blown up, and not yet
replaced. The handful of pious persons with whom they had met in 1848 had
been preserved in the midst of the danger; and their meetings had been
maintained and were increased in numbers. One of these, a widow, told them
that, during the bombardment of the city, a cannon-ball had entered her
house, and had passed by her bedside when her children were in the room,
and also that a shell had burst before her door; but on neither occasion
were any of the family hurt.[12]

At Stuttgardt they received the affecting intelligence of the decease of
Elizabeth Dudley, who died of cholera on the 6th of the Ninth Month. The
removal of this, one of her earliest and dearest friends, was a severe
stroke to Martha Yeardley, and sensibly affected her bodily health. In a
letter to her sisters, of the 14th of the Ninth Month, she thus gives vent
to her feelings:--


It would not be possible to set forth in words what we have felt from the
affecting intelligence contained in dear R.'s letter. What shall we do but
seek ability at the Divine footstool to bow in humble resignation to this
afflictive dispensation? I have had for some time a strong impression that
something of this kind awaited us in our immediate circle; and it was with
a trembling hand that I opened the letters. The tie which bound me to her,
and which is now perhaps for a very short time broken, as far as relates
to earthly things, was sealed upon my heart by a communion of more than
forty-eight years, and includes all the various changes of an eventful
life, during which my best feelings were ever cherished and encouraged,
both by example and precept, and by the tenderest affection. But I must
not dwell upon this subject, lest I become unfitted for the duties which
our present engagement daily calls for.


To these afflictive tidings was added some discouragement in respect to
their proposed journey to Russia. The little hope that John Yeardley still
entertained of being allowed to cross the Russian frontier was
extinguished by the information he received at Stuttgardt. A large number
of the German emigrants who settled in the South Russian colonies were
from the neighborhood of this city, and John Yeardley inquired of some of
their ministers, who had served in the colonies, how far the country was
likely to be accessible to a foreigner going thither to preach the gospel.
The information he received was unfavorable, and his endeavors to obtain
in this city the signature of the Russian ambassador to his passport were
fruitless.

They had, however, something to console them under these trials.


In all our former travels in Germany, says J.Y., we never experienced such
an open door and spirit of inquiry among the people as in the present
journey. It is said that there is scarcely a village in all Wuertemberg
where meetings for worship are not held in private houses. The late
revolutionists declare vengeance against these people, the pietists, as
they call them, and that if the war breaks out again, they are to be the
first to be cut off. But the present king gives them their liberty and his
protection, and has openly said the pietists have saved his
country.--(_Letter of 9 mo_. 15.)


Before they left Stuttgardt they were refreshed by a social evening's
recreation, one of those occasions of the familiar intercourse of
friendship, under the canopy of divine love, in which John Yeardley
especially delighted.


17_th_.--Our two young friends, Reuchlin, came to conduct us to their
garden among the vine-hills in the environs of the town. We there met
their precious mother, and were joined by a good many _interior_
ones, who had been invited to meet us. We had a precious little meeting in
the arbor, after which we gave them some account of the religious movement
in Belgium, &c., which pleased them much. We afterwards partook of fruit,
biscuits, and wine. I shall reckon this garden visit among the happy
moments of my life, because the presence of the Most High was with us.


On the 18th they went to Kornthal to visit the interesting society in that
place. Hoffmann's widow, who seems to have returned from Basle after the
death of her husband, was there, but so aged and infirm as to be confined
to the house. The inmates of the establishment were therefore convened in
some apartments adjoining her chamber, so that she could partake in the
spiritual repast. Their kind friend Reuchlin had prepared the way for
them; and when the assembly took their seats, a solemn silence ensued.
John Yeardley and "Brother" Koelne addressed the meeting, and the former
supplicated at the conclusion. On their way back to Stuttgardt, Madame
Reuchlin interrogated them on the doctrine of election, and was rejoiced
to hear from them their full belief in the universality of the grace of
God; and as they communicated to one another their convictions respecting
this great truth, their spirits were knit together in the love of the
gospel.

From another pious person in this city, John Yeardley received a word of
timely encouragement. He was anxious about their going into Bohemia, not
having, as he thought, a sufficiently clear guidance to determine his
course.


9 _mo_. 19.--A very acceptable visit from a worthy brother, Weiz. He
introduced himself and commenced speaking on the guidance and consolations
of the Holy Spirit, and spoke of his own experience as though he had known
the thoughts of my heart. I have, said he, sometimes earnestly prayed to
the Lord for direction what way to take, and have received no intimation;
all has been dark within; I knew not whether to go right or left, and I
have been compelled to go forward. I have then said, Lord, thou knowest my
heart, be pleased to prosper my way; I leave the consequence to thee.


The conclusion to which they came in regard to Bohemia was, not to attempt
the journey at that time, but to return to England for the winter, and
leave the remoter districts of the circuit which they had in prospect till
another year. They therefore returned by Heilbronn to Kreuznach, where
they again found many opportunities of instructing and strengthening such
as had made some progress in the Christian course.


26_th_.--This evening had about a dozen serious persons to tea. After
a long conversation, we read a chapter, and made some remarks: there was
also a time of silence, with supplication.

10 _mo_. 1. _First-day_.--This afternoon we attended a meeting
at Schwabenheim, a few miles from here. Notice had been given of our
intention to be present, and the company was consequently larger than
usual. They meet in an old convent, the other end of which forms the
parish place of worship. After the singing and a short prayer, the good
old A. Tiegel read a chapter in the New Testament, and was proceeding to
make some remarks upon it, when I stopped him, feeling something on my
mind to say to the people. I was led to recommend a patient waiting upon
God for the renewed help of his Spirit, and also to speak on the progress
of the Gospel Church from Isaiah ii. 2, 3, &c. My M.Y. spoke a little in
German on the "still small voice," and the teaching of the Spirit. I did
not in this instance feel quite easy to put aside the whole of their
service. After meeting we had coffee with Tiegel, and took back in our
carriage a few of our Kreuznach friends who had walked to the meeting.[13]

4_th_.--Yesterday evening we had a few friends with us two hours, by
appointment, to speak concerning the rules, &c., of our Society. Many
questions were asked, and a pretty detailed account given by us, as well
as we were able. The company were all satisfied, and wished to come again.

6_th_.--To-day we received a visit from a young English lady. She
came to ask how we understood the passages in Paul's Epistles forbidding
women to speak in the church. We soon gave her an answer, and handled the
matter so fully that she was quieted down before she left, little
thinking, as she acknowledged, that so much could be said in defence of
the practice among Friends. She even said she thought it to be a general
loss to the Christian Church that women are not permitted to take part in
the ministry. She is a thorough Millenarian, and said the prophecy in
Joel, that the Spirit should be poured out on all flesh, referred to the
coming of Christ to reign on the earth, until I reminded her of what
happened on the day of Pentecost, when Peter said expressly that it was
the fulfilment of the prophecy of Joel. Two other ladies were with her. We
parted friendly, and she thanked me for the information I had given her.

7_th_.--Went to Treisen to a meeting. The little company meet only
about eight persons usually, but we found about thirty assembled in a
small room. I thought it one of the most lively meetings we have had. They
wished me to conduct it in our own way. I told them we always commenced
our worship by sitting in silence. They said, We will also sit still. I
was favored with strength to speak to them of the pool of Bethesda, when
the angel troubled the water, and on the nature and advantage of true
silence before God. At the close, none seemed to wish to depart, but
entered into serious conversation. I think I never saw more satisfaction
exhibited at receiving books than on this occasion. After coffee, we
returned to our lodgings with thankful hearts.

In the evening came three young women, with an elderly lady, the mother of
one of them. We had much conversation, and a precious little meeting,
which concluded with solemn supplication--a nice finish to our sojourn in
interesting Kreuznach.

Our friend Ott has accompanied us; he has been to us as eyes in the
wilderness.


From Kreuznach they returned to Bonn, stopping at Darmstadt, Wiesbaden and
Neuwied. John Yeardley had allowed some discouragement to enter his mind
in regard to the meeting they had had the previous month at the Countess
Stynum's. They found, however, on repeating their visit to this place,
that the occasion in question had been one "of peculiar benefit and
encouragement." They renewed their religious intercourse with the Countess
and her friends to their great refreshment and joy.


12_th_.--The evening was spent with the Countess, in a quiet and more
private interview than she had with us the last time, owing to so many
strangers being present. After tea we had a long conversation on various
religious subjects, particularly on some points relating to the principles
of Friends, arising from what she had read in the books we left with her
in our former visit. We were glad of an opportunity to answer her
questions. A few of her private friends were present, much to our comfort.
Before leaving, the forty-sixth Psalm was read, and we had a comforting
time together: the Lord be praised! How sweet in him is the fellowship of
the gospel!


Writing to Josiah Forster from Bonn, John Yeardley makes some general
remarks on the religious state of Germany, as they had found it in their
frequent intercourse with individuals of various character during this
journey.


There is no doubt that there is in the German character generally a
tendency to the visionary. We have found a few who hold doctrines on
certain points, which it might do harm to publish; but we find or hear
nothing of fanaticism now as formerly. Those who are spiritually-minded
are more chastened, and more sound and scriptural in their views of
religious truth; but not without exception.


A meeting at Muehlheim "not large, but a good time," closed their religious
service in this part of their long and arduous engagement.

They arrived in England on the 20th of the Tenth Month, "with peaceful
feelings, and in gratitude to their Heavenly Father for all his mercies
towards his unworthy servants;" but "mourning the loss of some beloved
ones who had died in the Lord in their absence."

After about five months passed in the quiet of home, they made preparation
once more for accomplishing the work to which they had been called. The
prospect of distant travel was discouraging, both on account of Martha
Yeardley's weak health and of the state of the Continent; but, writes John
Yeardley, "my mind is peaceful, and I have an abiding conviction that it
is right to proceed, trusting in the Lord for light, strength and safety."

On their way through Belgium, the same feeling was strongly impressed upon
his mind.


1850. 4 _mo_. 7.--In the train, soon after leaving Brussels, my
spirit was melted under a feeling of the Lord's goodness. The object of
our journey came weightily before me, and I considered we had left our
home and every object most dear to our natural affections, with the sole
view to serve our Lord and Master, and in the desire to use our feeble
powers to draw souls to Him, that they might partake of spiritual
communion with the Beloved of souls, through his grace. A degree of
precious resignation followed; and, whatever may be the result as it
regards ourselves, I believe it is the Lord's will for us thus to go
forth, in his name; and should I or the precious partner of my bosom not
be permitted again to see our native land, we shall be happy and at rest,
through the mercy of that Saviour who gave his precious life for us.


On arriving at Berlin their first duty was to apply to the Russian
ambassador for his signature to their passport, with permission to enter
the Russian territory at Odessa. Their application met with an immediate
and positive refusal, and the extinction of his hopes in this respect was
to John Yeardley a grievous disappointment.

The next evening, after they had borne their burden all the day, dejected
in spirit, and uncertain which way to turn, their hearts were lightened by
a visit from August Beyerhaus, who at once attached himself to them and
offered them help. He could indeed do nothing to facilitate their entrance
into Russia, but he was the means of diverting their minds from the
consideration of what had now become hopeless, and of opening to them, in
Berlin, a door of usefulness. Through his introduction they became
acquainted with several devoted Christians, some of them of wide
reputation in the Church. These interviews, which were occasions of
heartfelt spiritual communion, are thus noticed in the Diary:--


4 _mo_. 22.--Samuel Elsner is an aged warm-hearted Christian, full of
faith and good works: he gave us important information, and will send me
some names of pious persons in Silesia.

Pastor Gossner we found green in old age; seventy-five years of a
variegated life have taught him many useful lessons. His refuge now is
strong faith in the Saviour. He was at work in his arm-chair, and was much
pleased to see us.

23_rd_.--Pastor Knack, successor to Gossner, is a man of a lively
spirit, to whom we at once felt united. He very liberally offered us the
liberty of speaking to his flock (the Bohemian congregation in Berlin);
and also invited us to visit the little company in the village where we
propose going this evening.

At 3 o'clock we had a sweet interview with Professor Neander, an aged man
of a striking figure and a Jewish countenance, pervaded by heavenly
calmness, and illumined by the bright shades of gospel light. His eyes are
become dim through excessive study; his heart is very large, full of love
and hope in Jesus Christ. He seemed pleased to hear some account of the
order of our Society, particularly with regard to the ministry and gospel
missions, observing, "With you, then, there is liberty for all to speak
when moved by the Holy Spirit, just as in the primitive church." This
observation led us to several points of our discipline, and he seemed
delighted that a society existed whose practice, in many things, came so
near to that of the primitive church. Before parting the spirit of
supplication came over us, under which prayer was offered, particularly
for this aged servant of the Lord. His disinterestedness is great. The
king will sometimes give him money, that he may take relaxation in going
to the baths, &c. But so susceptible is his heart for many who are
necessitous, that he will often give to others all that he has received.
The good king has then to repeat his gift, and send him away almost by
force from his labors.


After these choice visits, John Yeardley says:--


24_th_.--A ray of light and hope has broken in upon our gloomy
path,--not into Russia; there _Satan_ is still permitted to hinder;
but in this city.


They spent two days at Rixdorf, the village alluded to above, three miles
from Berlin, where was a small congregation of Bohemian Brethren, who took
refuge there in 1737. The women of the society held religious meetings by
themselves twice a week. These meetings had been instituted many years
before by Maria Liestig, to whom John and Martha Yeardley were introduced,
and whom they found to be of a meek and intelligent spirit. She gave them
a relation of her extraordinary conversion, which John Yeardley published
in No. 3 of his Series of Tracts, under the title of the _Conversion of
Mary Merry_. They held a meeting in the village, in which they both had
to "speak closely on the necessity of silence in worship." They had also a
small meeting at their hotel in Berlin, when "the gospel message flowed
freely, in speaking of the spiritual dispensation in which we live, and
the progress of light."

On the 29th they left Berlin, and went to the beautiful watering-place of
Warmbrunn, in Silesia. The dwellings of the laborers in Silesia struck
them as being of a wretched description. "What they do." says J.Y., "in a
rigorous winter, like the last, I cannot tell; they appeared to be mostly.
Roman Catholics."

They resided a month at Warmbrunn. Some of the simple incidents which
befel them there form the subjects of the following extracts:--


5 _mo_. 10.--Yesterday was a thorough rainy day; but in the
afternoon, to our surprise, came in eight men together, who had heard of
strangers having arrived in Warmbrunn to visit those who love the Saviour.
We explained to them our religious principles; their countenances
brightened when we spoke of the Spirit being poured out upon all--sons and
daughters. A sweet feeling was present with us, and supplication was
offered under much solemnity.

11_th_.--I have had a long conversation with C.W. Grossner, of
Breslau, on the Supper, &c. We opened the Testament, and read the various
passages, and I explained our views as well as I could. I think he is
brought under serious thoughtfulness, and half convinced of our principles
with regard to the rites, which he acknowledges are vain without the
substance. "Religion with many, nowadays," he observed, "is like a
polished shell without kernel."

13_th_.--The Countess Schaffgotsch sent her butler with a message
from the castle that she would be glad if we would call on her. She gave
us a hearty reception, and thanked us for taking so much interest about
the people. On our presenting her with some books;--But I am a Catholic,
she said. We told her that made no difference to us; we loved all who
loved the Lord Jesus. She spoke very sweetly of the influence of the
spirit.

14_th_.--The Countess paid us a long visit, and spoke much of the
Roman Catholic faith. She has no more faith in the efficacy of the prayers
of the saints than I have, and said she had not prayed to them now for
four years; their church only _advises_, not _commands_ it.

16_th_.--We went to dine with the Countess Reden and her sister, who
live at the castle in Buchwald, one of the most lovely spots in the most
lovely of countries. It is truly a peaceful abode, whose inmates fear
their God, love their neighbor, and greatly esteem their king. We had been
announced to the Countess from Berlin a week before; she and her amiable
sister received us as a brother and sister beloved in the Lord. I never
witnessed more intelligence combined with Christian politeness and real
simplicity. The Countess is about seventy-six years of age; she is the
president of the Bible Society, and the spiritual mother of all that is
good in the neighborhood. She nursed the present king on her lap when he
was a baby, and her great influence with him now she always turns to good
account in serving benevolence and religion. Both she and her sister spoke
with much affection of dear Elizabeth J. Fry, and her visit with Joseph
John Gurney.

26_th_.--Our last meeting, on First-day evening, consisted of all
men, several of whom had come from Erdmannsdorf and the colonies of the
Tyrolese. They seemed to appreciate the time of silence, and expressed
much satisfaction with having made our acquaintance, and with the meeting.


On the 30th of the Fifth Month, J. and M. Y. quitted Warmbrunn and
proceeded towards Bohemia.


We passed, says the former, through Hirschberg. Goldberg, Liegnitz, and to
Dresden, Leipzig, and Halle, making acquaintance in all these places with
serious persons, and, I hope, scattering here and there a little gospel
seed; but truly we may say, It is sown in weakness. At Halle we were much
gratified with our visit to Dr. Tholuck, but I think, not less so with his
wife, a most lovely person, delighting to _feel_ and to _do_
good.


On arriving at Dresden, it became evident that Martha Yeardley, who had,
suffered much for some time from an affection of the windpipe, required
repose and medical care; and they concluded to rest awhile at the baths of
Toeplitz. The illness of his wife, and some degree of bodily indisposition
from which he himself suffered, did not prevent John Yeardley from
employing the time in the diffusion of evangelical truth.

He had heard at Berlin that within a few months several hundred Bibles and
Testaments had been sent into Bohemia, and had been eagerly bought there
by awakened persons. He thought that if a translation could be made into
the Bohemian language of some simple religious tracts, much good might be
done by their dissemination; but he supposed that the intolerant laws of
the Austrian Empire, which forbad all freedom of religious action, were
still in full force. His account of his feelings and those of Martha
Yeardley under the burden which this supposition imposed on them, and of
the agreeable manner in which permission was unexpectedly granted them to
print and circulate their little messengers of peace, must be given in his
own words:--


Our hearts yearned towards the people, but we were afraid to give them
tracts, which in other places had often been the means to conversation and
to making acquaintance. This brought us low in mind; the body was already
weak enough before. We thought it would not do to pass through the country
in this state of depression, without trying to remove the cause. I went,
therefore, the next morning to the head of the authorities, took with me
one of our little tracts, mostly Scripture extracts, and asked whether I
might be allowed to have the little book, or such as I then presented to
him, printed for circulation. He received me politely, indeed kindly, and
looked pleased with my tract, saying as be turned over its innocent little
pages, Ah, nothing about politics; nothing against the religion of the
country: it is very good, it is beautiful. You are quite at liberty to
print and circulate such tracts as these. And when he found that the
object was to do good to all, without cost to the receiver, he said, That
is lovely.--(_Letter of 6 mo. 23._)


The Bohemian translations were not made until J. and M. Y. went to Prague,
which they did on the 22nd. Their feelings on entering this city, and the
manner in which they were helped in their work of love, are described in
the following diaries:--


6 _mo._ 23.--Last evening we arrived at Prague. Our heart sunk on
approaching this great city. The twenty-eight statues of saints, &c. on
the bridge, with the many lamps devoted to these images, the crucifixes,
&c., all indicated that superstition rages rampant.

We lost no time in sending to the Protestant pastors, one of whom kindly
came to us in the evening, and we conversed till late. I showed him my
little _Spiritual Bread for Christian Workmen_, with which he was
much pleased. I told him I wanted it translated into the Bohemian
language. This afternoon he paid us another visit, and brought his wife to
see my M.Y. He produced the translation of the introduction to the little
tract. We are to have 2000 printed. Most of the poor people read only the
Bohemian language. I have promised to place 1000 at the disposal of the
pastor; he is delighted with the opportunity of having anything of the
kind _printed in Prague_.

Much, adds J.Y. in a letter, as I have suffered in the long prospect of a
visit to this place, I feel a peculiar satisfaction that it has been
deferred until there is liberty to print and circulate gospel tracts.
Small as such a privilege may appear, until very recently such
distribution of books would have been visited with a very inconvenient
imprisonment on the individual transgressing the law.--(6 _mo_. 23.)

24_th_.--I gave Pastor Bennisch for perusal, and choice for
translation, William. Allen's _Thoughts on the Importance of
Religion_, and our tracts on the _Fall, Regeneration and Redemption,
True Faith, and the Voice of Conscience_. There is a great movement
among the Catholics; they have need to be instructed in the first
principles of Christianity, and it is very important that the doctrine of
faith in Christ should be combined with that of the practical working of
the Spirit as set forth in many of our tracts. On this account, I am glad
they are likely to take precedence of others in their circulation; for I
do not hear that any tracts decidedly religious have yet been printed in
Prague.


During their stay in the city, and after they left, there were printed
12,000 copies of the tracts in Bohemian, and 1000 in German.

At Toeplitz, which they revisited before leaving Bohemia, occurred the
interesting incident of the Bohemian soldier, which is related under that
title in John Yeardley's series of tracts, No. 4.

When they finally quitted the country, they took the nearest road to
Kreuznach. On the way, they distributed tracts in the villages, at one of
which, where they were detained for want of horses, the inhabitants
flocked so eagerly to them to receive these little messengers, that they
had difficulty in satisfying them. Notwithstanding this circumstance, the
reflection with which John Yeardley concludes his account of their travels
in Bohemia was, "It will require a power more than human to make the
_dry bones of Bohemia_ live."

They spent three weeks at Kreuznach, confirming the faith of the brethren,
and printing German translations of several tracts. In passing through
Neuwied, they intended only to spend the night there; but hearing that
much inquiry after the way of salvation had recently manifested itself in
the villages around, they decided, after the horses had been ordered for
departure, to remain and visit one of these villages. A meeting was
called, and so many attended that the room could not contain them all. It
was a good season; De Freis, the friend who had made them acquainted with
the religious condition of the place, accompanied them as guide, and was a
true helper in the work. He had been twenty years missionary in Greenland
and South Africa.

They returned home, both of them worn with travelling, and Martha Yeardley
exhausted with disease, which was making sure progress in her debilitated
frame; but they were supported by the peaceful consciousness of having
accomplished all the service to which they had been called to labor in
common.




CHAPTER XVIII.


DEATH OF MARTHA YEARDLEY, AND JOHN YEARDLEY'S JOURNEY TO NORWAY.

1851-2.

Martha Yeardley continued very unwell during the autumn, and by the end of
the year her disorder assumed a more alarming form. It soon became evident
that her dedicated life must at no distant period be brought to a close;
and after many weeks of suffering, with confinement to the chamber during
the latter part of the time, she expired, full of peace and hope in Christ
Jesus, in the Fifth Month, 1851. The following memorandum, touchingly
descriptive of her illness and death, was penned by her bereaved husband,
probably soon after her decease.


After our return from the Continental journey my beloved M.Y. became more
poorly. A severe influenza cold weakened her much; and a second attack she
seemed never to recover. It was succeeded by a regular rheumatic fever.
From the commencement of 1851, with but little exception, she was confined
to the house, and for a little while to her bed, until the 8th of the
Fifth Month, when her sweet and purified spirit ascended to her Saviour,
and commenced an eternity of bliss.

Thus was I deprived of my only earthly treasure. She was the Lord's
precious loan, granted me for nearly a quarter of a century, for which I
can never be sufficiently [thankful]. She was his own, bought with the
blood of his dear Son, and he saw meet to take her from me. Ours was a
blessed union, and a happy life, spent, I hope, unitedly in the service of
our Lord. In all our imperfections we did desire, above all earthly
things, to do the work of our Divine Master, and to labor for the
promotion of his kingdom, and for the spread of his knowledge in the
earth.

I was her only nurse till within ten days of her happy close. Long had a
covenant been made between us, in the time of health, that whichever of us
was taken ill the first, should be nursed by the surviving one, if
permitted and strength afforded; which it mercifully was to me, and a
happy season was the sick-room. We seemed to live together in heaven;
never, I think, could two mortals be more favored with the answer to
prayer.

In the early part of her illness she spoke much of the satisfaction she
had felt in our three last journeys to the Continent, and that she was
thankful in having been enabled to go through the whole of the service
which her Lord had put into her heart. I have since thought it was a mercy
that I did not proceed into South Russia, as, in all probability, my
precious one would have fallen on the journey, and never seen her peaceful
home again.

During the whole of the illness her delight was to speak of the joy of
heaven. My sins of omission and of commission, she said, are all passed
by; my iniquities are all forgiven, and washed away in the blood of the
Lamb; and now I rejoice in God my Saviour. His love and mercy to me are
beyond all bounds; and so strong is my faith in my precious Saviour, that
I have scarcely known, the whole of the illness, what it has been to be
troubled with an evil thought.

When she expressed a desire to go to Heaven, I reminded her of my
loneliness when she should be taken from me. The Lord will care for thee,
was her constant reply. He has promised me over and over again that he
will care for thee; the answer to my prayer has always been, I will care
for him.

Nearly the last conversation she had with any of her beloved relatives was
with ----, to whom she observed: My affection for thee is strong; I
believe thou lovest thy Saviour: I desire that thou mayest keep nothing
back that the Lord may require of thee, but serve him with greater
devotedness of heart; and if ever thou art called to bear public testimony
to his truth, be sure to preach the whole gospel, faith in Christ, and the
necessity of the practical work of the Holy Spirit to produce holiness of
life. To [another of her near relatives] she observed: Thou hast often
been sweetly visited by the love of thy Saviour, and be assured thou wilt
never find any joy equal to that of yielding thy heart in prompt obedience
to the will of thy Lord. Her last words to her affectionate sisters were,
The Lord bless you all: Farewell.


Towards the end of the year John Yeardley again communed with himself in
the language of sorrow, but also of humble resignation. At the same time
he speaks of an engagement of gospel labor from which he had then recently
returned, the first which he had undertaken alone since his marriage with
Martha Savory. Having seen his faithful and well-tried comrade fall by his
side, he had now to learn again to gird himself and enter, as in the days
of his youth, alone into the combat.


1851. 12 _mo._ 13.--How often have I prayed that the portion of her
Lord's spirit which animated her devoted life may rest on me! Her heart,
her tongue, and her pen were all employed in promoting the cause of her
Divine Master, whom she delighted to serve. All my earthly joy was now
gone to heaven, and I felt alone in the world; but my spirit seemed never
to be separated from her: she seemed to be hovering over me constantly. My
heart does sorrow for the loss of her sweet society; to me she was a wise
and sound counsellor, and a never-failing consoler in all my troubles. I
do mourn, but I dare not murmur. I hope my merciful Heavenly Father will
keep me in the hour of temptation, and be with me in the last trying hour,
and prepare me to join this precious one and all by whom she is surrounded
with her God and Saviour in the centre of bliss.

I had often mentioned to my precious one a prospect of religious service
in Ireland, and once since our return home from our last Continental
journey; when she replied, "I have no concern to go to Ireland--thou must
do that when I am taken from thee." It cost me many tears and prayers
before I could be resigned to request a certificate, alone, for the first
time since our union; but, looking seriously at the subject, the language
was constantly in my heart, The hour cometh when no man can work. Life is
uncertain, and I can only expect sustaining grace by faithfully following
my Lord: and, blessed be his name, he has kept and sustained me in every
trial.

This day would have been the twenty-fifth anniversary of our union. How
near it has brought my precious one to me in spirit, and how strong are my
prayers that my Lord may preserve me faithful to the end of the race! I
can say my desire is, when he cometh, he may not find me idle.


The visit which John Yeardley made in Ireland was general, comprehending
all, or nearly all, the meetings of Friends in the island, and including a
few public meetings in Leinster province. He has left very few notes of
this journey, except an itinerary of the places at which he stopped, but
makes frequent mention of the hospitality and kindness of Friends. From
Cork he writes:--


I am in the midst of a family visit to the Friends of Cork, and shall
have, I expect, from ninety to a hundred sittings. I am lodged a few miles
in the country, in a mansion surrounded by beautiful grounds, and all the
beloved inmates most affectionate and helpful to me. They send me to my
work in or about the city mostly to breakfast; and I return, in the
evening, and enjoy the refreshing breezes and the quiet: but then I have
the family visits to resume next morning. In riding to town to-day, I
tried to raise my heart to God; when the language sweetly occurred to me,
Bread shall be given thee, thy water shall be sure.--(_Letter of 8 mo.
5, 1851._)


A few days after his return from Ireland, he left home again to visit the
Isle of Man, in company with Barnard Dickenson. On his return, he was
refreshed by a visit to Dover, where he spent three weeks in the company
of his kind and sympathising friend Margaret Pope.

The interval which elapsed before the recommencement of his missionary
labors was to be short. In the First Month of 1852, we find him again
under exercise of mind for foreign travel; having, this time, to direct
his course towards the interesting community of religious persons in
Norway, whose principles and practices are the same as those of Friends.
The Diary which follows is the utterance of his heart in the prospect of
this work.


1852. 1 _mo._ 24.--This has been a precious morning unto my soul;
such a season of spiritual comfort I have not been permitted to experience
for a long time. I think it is vouchsafed me through the efficacy of
earnest prayer, which has brought me to resignation to my Lord's will. I
have now no more doubt as to Norway. Light springs on my path. How
powerful is the love of God when it fills the heart; there is not a place
on the Lord's earth where I think I could not go, if favored with the
strength, and blessed with the presence of my God and Saviour.

Unto thee, Lord, do I commit all my concerns, spiritual and temporal; do
thou give to thy unworthy servant an answer of peace. Keep me faithful and
patient to the end of the race. Lord, grant that my ministry, which thou
hast entrusted to me, may proceed purely and entirely from thy love, and
be exercised in thy fear and under the unction of thy Holy Spirit. Lord,
keep my heart fixed, on the last, last awful moment that I may have to
breathe; grant that it may be breathed out in the bosom of my adorable
Saviour; all sting of death taken away, my robes washed in his blood, and
my spirit purified and ready to be united to those beloved ones who are
already enjoying a blissful eternity with thee!


The next entry in the Diary was made at Christiania, where he thus speaks
of the unity and concurrence which his friends had testified with his
mission.


Since I last wrote any notes in this journal, I have passed through many
conflicts respecting my long-thought-of visit to Norway. When the subject
was proposed to my friends in London, it met with the warm encouragement
and sympathy of all, in every stage, to the receiving the full unity of
the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders.

I am accompanied by my dear friend, Peter Bedford, whose sweet and
constantly cheerful spirits comfort and cheer me. We have already had many
proofs that our being joined together in this laborious journey is of the
Lord. Our friend William Robinson proves an efficient helper.


John Yeardley and his companions left London on the 9th of the Sixth
Month, and went first to Homburg, as he wished to place a young person in
whom he was interested, at the school kept by the sisters Mueller at
Friedrichsdorf, near that town. Whilst at Homburg he was suddenly attacked
with a severe and painful disorder, and was reduced to great extremity.
After about two weeks of suffering, he was restored to convalescence, when
he thus breaks forth:--


How can I sufficiently record the mercy of my God in sustaining me in a
time of great extremity, even when there was but little prospect of my
ever seeing Norway. He blessed me with resignation and sustaining grace,
so that I could rest as on the Saviour's bosom, for life or death. I knew
my Lord and Master could do without my poor unworthy service in Norway;
but if he had work for me to do in that land he would raise me up in his
own time; and so he has done.


As soon as he had sufficiently recovered his strength, they set forth for
Kiel; but not before John Yeardley had had a religious meeting with the
pupils in the school.


I was, he says, enabled to address them in German; a precious feeling was
over us, and many spirits were tendered before the Lord. F. Mueller
expressed her great satisfaction with this parting visit.


They reached Kiel by easy stages in seven days. From this place he
writes:--


My very soul pants to be in Norway; had I wings I could fly there. And yet
how few are the days since the cloud between me and that land was so dense
that I could not see through it. But even then, O, what sweet peace and
resignation were the clothing of my humbled spirit. There seemed nothing
in my way to heaven, whether from Germany or Norway. I do believe my eye
and heart are fixed on my precious Saviour, and he has been my stay in the
hour of sore conflict of body, but none of mind. All seemed peace and
bliss when I glanced at the happy home above, already inhabited by my
precious one and many more who were dear to us on earth.--(_Letter of
7 mo._ 2, 1852.)


On the 5th of the Seventh Month they proceeded to Christiania, John
Yeardley employing the time on the voyage in adding to the little stock of
the Norse language which he had acquired at home in anticipation of the
journey. On landing at Christiania they were refreshed by seeing Asbjoen
Kloster of Stavanger, who had come to meet them, and for two weeks had
been waiting their arrival.


At a meeting which they held in this city, both John Yeardley and Peter
Bedford were engaged to minister to the spiritual wants of the people; A.
Kloster interpreting for them. The company were so much interested, that
many of them went afterwards to the hotel to converse and ask for tracts.

The Friends left Christiania on the 10th, and sailed through the
rock-bound sea to Christiansand, the passage between the cliffs being in
some places so narrow that there was no more room than was sufficient for
the vessel to pass.

In this town they enjoyed much freedom in the gospel, and held two public
meetings. Regarding the first of these, John Yeardley says:--


7 _mo_. 13.--Our large room at the hotel was filled half an hour
before the time appointed, and it was with difficulty that we made our way
to our seats. A little unsettlement prevailed from the desire to enter,
which subsided after a few explanatory words. A time of quiet ensued, and
there was much openness to receive the gospel message. Before the close of
the meeting I became exceedingly thoughtful about appointing another for
the next evening; and on intimating the same to P.B., I found he was under
the same impression. It was, therefore, announced to the assembly before
they separated, and appeared much to satisfy them. The dear people were
unwilling to part from us without a shake by the hand.--(_Diary and
Letter_.)


At one of the meetings which they held in this town, whilst John Yeardley
was preaching, he became sensible that his interpreter had himself
received something to communicate to the congregation; he therefore
stopped speaking, and the interpreter, faithful to his duty, took up the
word until he had cleared his mind from its burden. After he had finished,
John Yeardley resumed his discourse.

On the 14th the Friends drove out a few miles into the country to "pay
some family visits." They had two double carrioles, or gigs: the road over
which they passed was "steep and rugged beyond description." In returning,
the carriole in which Peter Bedford rode struck against a rock at a sharp
corner and was overset. Peter Bedford's right shoulder was dislocated, and
he otherwise bruised. In conveying him into Christiansand he suffered much
from the shaking of the car; but the joint was quickly set by a skilful
surgeon; and, in the evening, the love he felt for the people was so
strong, that he could not remain absent from the meeting which had been
appointed for that time, and he even took part in its vocal exercise.


It was, writes John Yeardley, a favored time. Peter Bedford gave some
account of the difference between our religious Society and other
professing Christians. It opened the way for me to speak on the peculiar
doctrines and practices of Friends at more length than I ever remember to
have done before; after which the glad tidings of the gospel flowed
freely, and the people were invited to come to Christ and partake of the
full blessedness of his teaching by the Holy Spirit. A precious solemnity
prevailed, and the serious attention of the company was great. A good many
soldiers, and some officers, were present; but the expression of our
dissent from all wars and fightings had not displeased them, for they
shook hands with US most kindly.--(_Diary and Letter_.)


Besides being interested for the people of Christiansand in general, John
Yeardley and Peter Bedford were especially attracted towards several young
men who had embraced the doctrines of Friends, without any knowledge of
the Society, and without any instruction from man. With these persons they
met more than once. John Yeardley writes:--


"We had a precious meeting with them. They were invited to embrace the
doctrines of the gospel in living faith, and to give full room to the
workings of the Spirit of Jesus, whose voice they had already heard
inviting them to come under his teaching. We encouraged them to meet for
divine worship."


On the 16th the Friends proceeded thirty-five miles to Mandal, travelling
post. From thence, John Yeardley and Asbjoen Kloster went by the road to
Stavanger, leaving Peter Bedford and William Robinson to follow by
steam-vessel, the former being unable to bear the motion of the Norwegian
carriages.

John Yeardley, in one of his letters, in a lively manner describes the
mode of travelling:--


The usual vehicle in this country is the single-seated carriole, made
exactly to fit the figure of the traveller, and no spare room except a
little well under his feet. The seat is placed on two crossbars fixed to
the long shafts, the spring of which is intended to mitigate the jolting
of the road. We chose double cars on iron springs, which we found _not
too easy_: they were like old-fashioned, worn-out, and very shabby
English gigs. The posting is under government regulation, and is performed
by sure-footed ponies kept by the farmers, who are obliged to supply them
under any circumstances after having had notice. A _forbud_ is sent
on with printed notices filled up with the time at which the traveller
expects to arrive at each station. This _avant-courier_ is often a
little boy, and sometimes, to save the expense of a horse, for which the
traveller has paid, he is sent on foot. On one occasion we met a young
girl, with bare feat, who had walked sixteen miles with notice papers, as
our _forbud_. Now away goes the traveller, accompanied by a man, or
more often a boy, or it may be a little girl, to bring back the pony. They
run by the side, but down hills always seat themselves behind on the
luggage as best they can. The traveller drives himself, and the little
horses are so brisk that, whatever the state of the road may be, they run
down the mountains as fast as they can clatter, and so sure-footed that
they are scarcely ever known to fall; but a person of weak nerves has no
business to be the rider.

From Christiansand to Stavanger is about 200 miles, which took us four
days. Our road lay occasionally over a wild and stony heath by the sea,
sometimes along the river-banks, lakes, or fiords, but more often among
and upon the high and rugged rocks; the passing of some of which is, I
think, more difficult than crossing the Alps between Switzerland and
Italy.--(_letter of 8 mo. 3._)


On the way towards Stavanger John Yeardley had a public meeting at
Flekkefiord, the first time such a meeting had been held in the place. It
was "a good time," and so well attended that the town-hall could not
contain nearly all who came together.

Immediately on arriving at Stavanger, the Friends commenced visiting the
families of the Friends in the town and on the adjacent islands; and on
the next First-day held a meeting about eleven miles up one of the fiords,
to which so many flocked from all directions that they were obliged to
assemble in the open air:--


It was, says J.Y., a lovely sight to see so many clean-dressed peasants,
in their mountain costume, with a seriousness in their countenances which
indicated that a motive better than curiosity had brought them together. I
was reminded and had to speak of the miracle of our blessed Saviour, when
he commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass, and fed them with
five barley loaves and two fishes.

Since this time, he says in a letter, we hold our public meetings in the
open air, and the stillness that prevails is quite remarkable. Last
evening we had a solemn opportunity in a plantation belonging to one of
our Friends by the seaside. The hushing of the trees, the gentle rolling
of the waves behind a strong sea-wall, and the warbling of the little
birds, all seemed to aid our worship; but these would have been nothing
had not the presence of our Divine Master been near. After the meeting, as
many as could be seated partook of tea, &c. The seriousness, simplicity,
kindness and hospitality, are great. All flock together as if they were
one family.--(7 _mo_. 28.)


After this the Friends availed themselves of the efficient assistance of
Endre Dahl, and of the active peasants who form a large portion of the
Society of Friends there, in a more extensive excursion which they made up
one of the fiords which in so remarkable a manner intersect the country.
John Yeardley gives a graphic description of this voyage.


Our efficient helper prepared his own boat; our ship's company are all
volunteers. We set out with seven, but were joined by others on the way,
so that this morning we started with ten men. They are a most cheerful and
playful company, all interested in the object of our voyage. It does my
heart good to see with what delight they bring planks for seats, and run
in all directions to give notice of our meetings. Each seems to strive
which shall show us the most attention, even anticipating our wants. They
enjoy our family readings and worship; their conduct is instructive; and
the solemnity on these occasions precious.

On Fifth-day we landed on an island (Findon) sprinkled with trees, and
with a park-like bank sloping to the water. This was refreshing to the eye
after having seen nothing but bare rook for many days. The meeting was at
our friend's house who owned the pretty little farm. It was sweet and
refreshing; and afterwards a number of these people accompanied us to the
boat, and did not quit their standing till we were out of sight. My heart
yearned towards them in gospel love.

Next morning we started before 6 o'clock, and when we had rowed fourteen
English miles put into a little village, Ielsom. We were all strangers in
the place, and Friends and their principles unknown. Our friend Endre Dahl
had a pointing that we should try for a meeting, which was appointed for
2 o'clock. After waiting till 3, only one or two persons came, and we had
a consultation whether we should proceed on our voyage, but concluded it
safer to go in and sit down. When we were seated (I may say in faith),
first one and then another came in, till the large room and passage were
filled, and a number were outside under the windows. It was quite a
remarkable meeting, and we were well satisfied in having exercised
patience as well as a little faith. We were informed that it was the
custom of the place not to attend any appointed meeting till an hour after
the time named.

We arrived at Sand about 9 o'clock, after hard rowing, the tide being
against us. Sand is beautifully placed at an opening in the rocks, at the
mouth of a river where salmon-fishing is good. As soon as we landed, our
ship's company made the object of our journey known, when a
serious-looking man immediately offered to go about six miles to inform a
person who he knew would like to attend. Two individuals in this place
have for some time been in the practice of holding a silent meeting for
worship; they had no knowledge of Friends, nor Friends of them.


Fixing the meeting for the First-day evening, John Yeardley and his
companions pursued their way the next morning, which was Seventh-day, to
Saevde, situated at the head of the fiord, and consequently the extreme
point of their voyage. Before starting they went a little way up the Sand
river, to view one of the grand Norwegian waterfalls, and also to see how
the salmon-fishery is conducted.


A hamper of about six feet in diameter, and the same height, made by the
fisherman of the roughest wicker-work, is placed in a side stream of the
rock, in the bed of the river. The anxiety of the salmon to mount up the
stream is so great, that he forces himself through a hole into the hamper,
as the easiest way of advancing upwards, from which position he cannot
again escape. In this manner, in a favorable season, sixty-three salmon
have been caught in one night in a single basket. It is a source of wealth
to the little town of Sand.


At Saevde they held a meeting on First-day morning.


We reached the head of the fiord, writes John Yeardley by 12 o'clock, and
found but poor accommodation. We three had one room with three beds; Endre
Dahl with his willing-hearted and contented men lodged in a barn on straw.
There was time enough to arrange for a meeting in the morning, and we
applied for a room at the inn; but a little knot of illiberal Haugeans
[followers of Hauge], or _Saints_, as they call themselves, persuaded
our landlord not to let us meet in his house. But we obtained better
accommodation under the rocks in a house containing two rooms connected by
a passage, and, seating ourselves in the centre, could be well heard by
those outside the door. We had a good meeting.


Returning to Sand, he continues:--


The wind being against us, the men had to work very hard at the oar to
bring us in time for the meeting appointed for 6 o'clock at Sand. Some of
the Friends from near Saevde accompanied us in their small boat; and some
from Sand had gone many miles to attend the meeting at Saevde, and returned
to the one at Sand. Their zeal is great and their love fervent. This was a
very crowded meeting, and proved a satisfactory time. We found here a few
of the _Saints_, but of a more liberal cast; they expressed great
grief that their brethren at the head of the fiord had refused the
peaceable messengers of the gospel from a far country a house in which to
meet. This unwelcome news had reached them long before our arrival.


At a later date, John Yeardley relates an occurrence which happened at
Sand, worthy of note in itself, and which must have been not a little
confirmatory of his faith. It came to his knowledge after his return to
Stavanger.


When we were at Sand, one of the Friends who joins in holding the silent
meeting invited several of our ship's company to his house; but the man's
wife was so exasperated that she drove them away, saying she would not
have such folks under her roof. She had confounded the principles of
Friends with those of some wild persons who had gone about the country
spreading ranterism, and giving the people the idea that they were of our
Society. It was in vain to reason with her, and the husband, for the sake
of peace, mildly consented to let the Friends withdraw. However, she
attended our public meeting, where the gospel doctrine of our Society was
pretty fully illustrated; and I felt constrained also to preach on the
unreasonableness of persecution for conscience' sake, either by the
government, private persons, or families. Conviction seized her heart, and
she became broken to pieces. After the meeting she sought up the Friends
whom she had driven from her house, and told them she could not be happy
unless they would give her a proof of forgiveness by taking up their abode
in her family so long as they might remain in the place. Several of them
accepted the invitation, which gave them an opportunity for free and
satisfactory conversation.

How merciful are the Lord's doings with us in sending help in the needful
time! I was so spent when we arrived at Sand, having had nothing from
breakfast till 5 o'clock, that I said in my heart, It is impossible to get
through the meeting this evening.


The Friends had some religions service at several other places about
Stavanger, and on the 6th of the Eighth Month proceeded northward to
Bergen, accompanied by Endre Dahl and his wife and Asbjoen Kloster. Their
chief service in this city was a public meeting, at which there was a
large attendance. John Yeardley says of the meeting:--


There was a great mixture of feeling. Many pious, thirsty souls, I
believe, were present, and I hope such were encouraged and comforted; but
the strong impression on my mind was to call the sinner to repentance.


On their way back to Stavanger, among the passengers were two Finland
convicts, for whose peculiar case they felt much sympathy.


On board our steamer were two prisoners on the deck, in heavy irons. They
were natives of Finland, and had been sentenced to some months'
confinement in irons at Christiania, for having, it is said, committed
some outrage on the priest in disturbing the national worship. There has
for some time past been a great awakening about religion in Finland and
other parts of the North, and the most active among this number, in their
zeal not tempered with right knowledge, have transgressed the law. I
heartily pitied the two poor creatures, inasmuch as I feared justice had
not been done them; the prejudices of the priests and judges are so great
in all matters connected with any separation from the national worship.
They were chained together, and were clothed in their native reindeer
skins, and on their ironed feet were snow-sandals turned up with a long
toe. We offered them money, but they turned from it; and when acceptance
of it was pressed, their change of countenance indicated anger. They
understood nothing but the Finnish language.


On their return to Stavanger, Peter Bedford felt that his share in the
work was accomplished, and that it was not his part to accompany John
Yeardley in the service which remained for the latter to do in Norway.
After being present at another public meeting in Stavanger, and in a
parting interview with the Friends of the town, he went with William
Robinson direct to Kiel. John Yeardley had two or three more meetings in
the neighborhood of Stavanger, where the desire of the people to attend
was more remarkable than ever.

On the 11th of the Eighth Month he bade farewell to this interesting
place, and, accompanied by Endre Dahl, again crossed the mountains to
Christiansand, holding meetings at several places on the sea-coast, where
none had ever been held before. His notices of some of these meetings are
well worth transcription.


14_th_--Journeyed about fourteen miles up the fiord, into the
mountains, to Aamut in Qvindesdalen. This meeting was the most solemn of
any we have had. Many said, in tears, at the conclusion, This is a
doctrine that we cannot resist; it goes to our heart, and meets the
conviction of our own experience. What shall we do?--our heart burns
within us!

15_th_.--We returned to Foedde to a meeting this afternoon, which
was, I think, the largest we have had. There were two large rooms filled,
and a number seated on planks on the grass; not less than about 700
persons were present. Many followed us to the lodging, to converse on
subjects that lay near their hearts, and to ask for tracts and books.
Among them was a man who goes about to exhort the people to amendment of
life. He appeared to be a simple, sincere character, and was much
satisfied with our meeting, saying, as if from the bottom of his heart,
How remarkably, how wonderfully, have the truths of the gospel been opened
and explained to us this day!

16_th_.--At Fahrsund we had some difficulty to procure a place for a
meeting. It is a brandy-drinking place. No one would bear anything of our
business. A rich old lady has a large room which she lets for all kinds of
purposes except for anything connected with _religion_; she gave an
abrupt refusal to the application. E. Dahl and I went to the English
vice-consul, showed him my certificate, and explained to him the object of
my visit to Fahrsund. He kindly accompanied us to the old lady, and told
her that we belonged to a respectable religious society in England and
were not the persons she supposed, come to preach wild doctrines. She
consented to let us occupy the entrance-hall, which was good and spacious.
The consul then went with me to call on the sheriff; he said he and his
lady would attend the meeting, which they did, with a good many of the
respectable inhabitants, but the common people would not come near us. One
man to whom a notice was offered, when he saw the word _worship_,
immediately tore it to pieces. The lady to whom the room belonged sat near
me all the meeting, and looked serious before the close; and she took
leave of us with very different feeling from that in which she first met
us. The sheriff came to me after the meeting and offered his hand, saying,
I thank you for the present occasion--I shall never forget it.


Before the meeting at Foedde John Yeardley had an opportunity of
refreshing his mind with the charms of Norwegian nature.


My friend E. Dahl and I went out for a quiet walk. It was a lovely Sabbath
morning; the sky cloudless, and the sun shining brightly on the water as
it rapidly foamed down the cliffs. After gathering a few cranberries we
seated ourselves on a shady rock to meditate. All was silent
around--nothing heard but the shepherd-boy playing his horn; the sound
coming from the distant mountains into the wooded valley where we sat,
first shrill, then softening into a simple irregular note. My friend asked
me what I thought the instrument was. It is made, said he, of a goat's
horn, and is blown to keep the fox from taking the young lambs, and as a
means of communication with other shepherds when widely separated on the
mountains; the sound of this horn also keeps the sheep from straying.


They arrived at Christiansand on the 19th; and Endre Dahl, finding a
vessel sailing for Stavanger, engaged a passage in it for himself. After
parting with him, John Yeardley writes:--


E. Dahl and I have been closely united in the gospel bond; he has been a
truly affectionate sympathizer and efficient helper. I am thus, he
continues, left alone in a strange land; but I do feel a peaceful and a
thankful heart to my Heavenly Father that he has in mercy blessed me with
light, strength, and faith to go through this service in Norway.
Imperfectly has it been performed, I know; but I have done what I could,
and a song of thanksgiving is due to my Lord.


John Yeardley returned by Germany to England. At Obernkirchen, near
Minden, where some persons had not long before been convinced of Friends'
principles, he had a meeting, in which he was joined by a number of
Friends from Minden. A few years before, Thomas Arnett, from America,
desired to hold a meeting for worship in this place, but was prevented by
the police. The object was now accomplished by engaging a room without the
limits of the state of Bueckeburg, in which the town is situated, and
within the Hessian frontier, which includes, in fact, a part of
Obernkirchen.


A public meeting for worship in that place (says John Yeardley, in a
letter written after his return home,) was such a new thing, that on our
arrival we found a press of persons whom the room could by no means
contain. The landlord readily granted us his barn, which was commodious,
and we threw open the large doors into the yard, which was seated; besides
which, the people stood in numbers. We had a solemn meeting. There is a
little company who hold a meeting at Obernkirchen; several of these have
suffered on account of their religions scruples in refusing baptism to
their children, &c. These we invited after meeting to take coffee with us,
about thirty persons, all serious. It was a delightful occasion. After the
coffee we had a sweet parting meeting with this truly interesting company.
We had been given to expect that, although we had taken the precaution to
_pitch our tent_ without the limits of the intolerant place, the
police would be present, and would most probably disperse our assembly.
But no such thing;--all was quiet.

I was thankful (he adds in his Diary) that the meeting was held in quiet,
for there is a bitter feeling of persecution in the neighborhood. I was
previously much cast down, but "thanks be unto God who always causeth us
to triumph in Christ."




CHAPTER XIX


HIS JOURNEY TO SOUTH RUSSIA.

1853.

The call which John Yeardley had received to visit the German colonies in
South Russia, and which had lain for a long time dormant, now revived. A
friend who had watched with regret his unsuccessful attempts on former
journeys to enter that jealous country, and who augured from the political
changes which had taken place that permission might probably now be
obtained, brought the subject again under his notice. The admonition was
timely and effectual. After carefully pondering the matter--with, we doubt
not, as on former occasions, a childlike dependence on his Omniscient
Guide for direction,--he came to the conclusion that it was his duty once
more to address himself to this undertaking: and when it was accomplished,
and he had returned in safety and peace to England, he alluded more than
once to the manner in which the concern had been revived, saying he had
been, before he was thus aroused, like _the prophet asleep_.

He re-opened the prospect of this service before his Monthly Meeting, on
the 3rd of the Fifth Month, 1853. In a letter written the same day, he
says:--


I am just returned from our Monthly Meeting in London, where I mentioned
to my friends my concern to visit the German colonies in the South of
Russia, which, thou wilt probably recollect, was included in my
certificate for religious service on the Continent of Europe, five years
ago. I received the expression of much sympathy and unity from my
friends, and the certificate was ordered, including on my return, if
permitted, any service that may present in Constantinople, the island of
Malta, and some places in the South of France. Weak as I am, I cast myself
once more into the hand of our Lord and Blessed Protector, in holy
confidence that he will do all things well.


On receiving a passport from the Secretary of State, with the requisite
counter-signature of the Russian Ambassador, he wrote to John Kitching,
the 25th of the Fourth Month:--


I want thee to know that, through the kind and efficient aid of our
mutually dear friend Samuel Gurney, I have at length been enabled to
procure a Russian passport, and also a letter of recommendation to one of
the first houses in Petersburg. Thou knowest, my dear friend, for a long
time this matter has been heavy on my mind. It is a great comfort to have
the ground cleared in this respect.


John Yeardley left London at the end of the Sixth Month, and went to Hull
to take the steam-packet direct to Petersburg. In the narrative which
follows, we have interwoven with the Diary extracts from his letters to
his sisters; and we have been allowed the use of William Rasche's Journal,
in relating and describing many circumstances of which J.Y. himself made
no record.


_Petersburg. 7 mo._ 10.--On the 30th of the Sixth Month I left my
peaceful home at Stamford Hill for my Russian journey. At our kind friend
Isabel Casson's at Hull I met my young companion William Rasche. We were
affectionately cared for by dear I. C. and her daughter, and she and
several other friends saw us on board the steamer. It is a fine ship, well
ventilated, with good sleeping accommodation and provisions: the captain
is a kind, religious man.

On First-day evening, the captain invited us to the ship's service--an
invitation which we gladly embraced. When he had finished, I addressed the
company, much to my own comfort: great seriousness prevailed. After I had
relieved my mind, the captain closed with a few sweet and feeling words.
When the occasion was over, he came to me and expressed his thankfulness
that I had been enabled to strengthen his hands by throwing in a word of
exhortation. He said that sometimes, when he had felt indisposed and
unprepared for his religious duty, he had given himself to a quiet
dependence on the Lord, and had been mercifully helped, to the benefit of
his own soul, in endeavoring to do his duty to others.

There is great uncertainty (he says in a letter written during the
voyage), how we shall find things at Petersburg, and whether they will
permit us to proceed to the South; but this I must leave. Whatever way it
may please Providence to turn the matter, as it regards myself I believe I
shall be relieved from Russia in having made this last attempt.


They arrived at Petersburg on the 9th of the Seventh Month, after a safe
and agreeable passage of seven days.


Before we reached Cronstadt, to quote from J.Y.'s Diary, we encountered a
strong gale, so that the officers from the guardship, who came to see that
all was in order, had hard work to get on board. There were eighteen
Russian sailors with oars, yet they could not draw the boat, and our
steamer was obliged to throw ropes and haul her in. The sight of Cronstadt
was formidable; for more than two miles in and near the harbor there was a
line of ships of war. At Cronstadt we had to be put on board a smaller
steamer, which caused us much detention. At the custom-house all passed
off well; they were more civil and less strict in their examination than
in England. The Russian sailors look very unbright; they are not active in
managing a boat. They not unfrequently received a few strokes from the
fist of the helmsman, or a rope's-end, either of which they took with that
unconcerned composure which showed they were accustomed to it. We are
located at the hotel of H. Spink, an intelligent Yorkshireman; his wife is
very kind and attentive.

13_th_.--Spent this day at Peterhoff, with W.C. Gillibrand and wife,
with two of their friends. It is the first opportunity we have had for
serious conversation in this place, and I hope it was to mutual comfort.
They took us a drive after dinner to see several of the Emperor's
pavilions, mostly surrounded by beautiful pieces of water. There was an
intelligent man present, who had spent some time in India, ---- Watson; he
now has charge of the British school in Petersburg. We find the Scripture
Lessons are no more in use in the school; nor is the New Testament in the
Russian language allowed to be circulated in the country. The Bible
Society is just alive, but can hardly breathe; other institutions languish
for want of support; party spirit has crept in to their great injury. The
law is still very stringent in not allowing a member of one religious body
to join another; but the different sects are allowed their own worship and
schools.

20_th_.--Left Petersburg by the train at 11 o'clock yesterday, and
arrived at Moscow about nine this morning. The road, with but little
exception, is flat and uninteresting. The forests are immense, mostly of
firs and birch, which being thickly set grow small. Many of the stations
are superb. The line of railway did not conduct us near any towns or
villages that I could observe, but by some of the poorest scattered huts
I ever saw in any country.


At Moscow, John Yeardley and his companion called on Pastor Dietrich, a
German, residing a little out of the city:--

He is, says J.Y., in one of his letters, a worthy pastor of the Old
Lutheran Church, a sweet venerable-looking man with long white locks. He
was at dinner with his family when we called, but he would not allow us to
go away, but took us up to the attic story to his study; primitive indeed,
but clean, and to him I have no doubt a room of prayer, as well as of
study. He seemed delighted to find our mission was to the Colonies. "But
what will you do about the language?" said he; "they speak nothing but
German." I wish the dear girls could have seen his countenance lighted up
with cheerful brightness, when he found we could speak German: "Ah, I need
not trouble you any longer with my poor English!" He knows a great many of
the pastors, and will give us letters of introduction to the little flocks
in the Colonies and the Crimea.


As might be expected, it was with a sinking heart that John Yeardley
contemplated the formidable journey before him; but, as in other times
of extremity, he cast himself wholly upon the Lord, and found his soul to
be sustained, and his courage renewed to undergo the hardships that
awaited him.


7 _mo_. 21.--Rose this morning much cast down in mind at the thought
of our long journey, and a want of a knowledge of the Russian language.
Poured my complaint in fervency of soul before the Lord, and was a little
comforted in believing that he would still care for us and preserve us in
this strange and long wilderness travel. It is his own cause in which I am
engaged, and I am willing to endure any bodily fatigue if I may only be
strengthened to do the works to which my blessed Master has called me. The
Divine Finger seems pointing to the place where the people I am seeking
are to be found.

I went after breakfast to the dear Pastor Dietrich. His heart was filled
with love for me, and I felt the sweetness of his spirit to encourage me;
preciously was the divine unction spread over us. He gave me some
information of the religious state of things here. There seems to be about
800 of the evangelical party in Moscow, including the French and English
Protestants, and the different classes of Lutherans; a small number out of
350,000 souls which the city contains; the rest are Roman Catholics and of
the Greek church, mostly the latter. God knows the hearts of all.

22_nd_ [?]. "In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be
ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness. Bow down thine ear to me;
deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for a house of defence to
save me."--(Ps. xxxi. 1, 2.) "Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry;
give ear unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips."--(Ps.
xvii. 1.) The above sweet words were brought home to my heart with power
this morning after a time of conflict in spirit. Lord, grant me faith and
patience to the end of the race, when I shall have to say, Now, Lord,
lettest thou thy servant depart in peace. Amen.


Providing themselves with food, and with small change of money for the
journey--two things indispensable to Russian travel--John Yeardley and
William Rasche left Moscow on the 23rd, by _malle-poste_ for Orel.
They stopped some hours at Toula: the land south of this town they found
to be well-cultivated, and the harvest had begun; it consisted mostly of
rye. The journey to Orel occupied forty-four hours. Among their
fellow-travellers was a resident of Moscow, Charles Uyttenhoven, who spoke
English, German, French and Russ, and who, like themselves, was going to
Kharkov. He was a pleasant and gentlemanly companion, and was of great
service to them in acting as spokesman on the road.

From Orel there was no _malle-poste_ in which they could continue
their journey, and they were obliged to hire a _tarantas_, or
posting-carriage, a very inferior kind of conveyance. In consequence,
besides, of the fair at Pultowa, every vehicle of this description had
been taken up except one, which was of course the worst in the town. When
they had loaded their luggage and spread hay to lie upon, they started;
but before they were out of sight of the stable the crazy vehicle broke
down, and they were detained till nearly eleven o'clock at night, whilst
it was being repaired. In this new kind of conveyance they experienced
great discomfort: they could neither sit nor lie with ease, as the space
was much too small for three passengers. The country they passed, through
was very rich; it may be called the granary of Russia; they found the
harvest more advanced the farther they penetrated into the south.

At Koursk they hired a fresh _tarantas_. The roads were inferior to
those along which they had travelled, but the country was more
picturesque, still fertile, and producing much wheat; the weather was very
hot, as it had been all the way from Petersburg. On the 27th, at midnight,
they reached Kharkov.


We have travelled, says John Yeardley, four days and nights in succession
from Moscow to this place. The conveyances of the country are exceedingly
bad; they almost shook our bones asunder.


The next day they visited Pastor Landesen, to whom they had a letter of
introduction from Pastor Dietrich. They spent the day with the family of
this intelligent and pious man. Tea was spread in the garden, to which
meal a number of Christian friends were invited.


The pastor's wife, says John Yeardley, is a sweet-spirited woman. After
much social converse our garden-visit closed with a religious occasion, in
which I expressed a few words of exhortation. I think we were sensible of
the nearness of the presence of our Divine Master, which proved a brook by
the dreary way. We met at the pastor's Louse Superintendent Huber, a
worthy and experienced Christian, kind and fatherly to us.


The next day William Rasche went with Pastor Landesen to hire a carriage.
No such thing, however, was to be had, and they would have been happy if
they could have engaged as good a vehicle as their old crazy
_tarantas_; for the only alternative was a _bauer-wagen_
(peasant's cart), if we except the very expensive extra-post carriage,
with which they would have been obliged to take a conductor. It happened
that a young man, an apothecary's assistant, wanted to go to
Iekaterinoslav; his ancestors were German, and he could speak both that
language and Russ. By Landesen's recommendation they took him as their
companion, and he was very useful to them on the road. The
_bauer-wagen_ was much more uncomfortable than the _tarantas_
had been; travelling in it was like gallopping over a bad road in an
English farmer's waggon; and, as the vehicle had no cover, the travellers
were exposed without protection to the full power of the sun. The floor of
the waggon was spread with mattresses, and, thus furnished, it served them
for parlor, kitchen, and lodging-room.

They travelled in this way through the night, but the next day were
obliged to wait at a small dirty station for horses till the afternoon;
and in the evening John Yeardley became so ill, from hard travelling and
exposure to the heat, that they were compelled to alight at another little
station near Novomoskovsk, and make the best of the poor accommodation
they could procure. The next morning, somewhat refreshed by rest, they
went forwards to Iekaterinoslav, where they happily met with a clean inn,
the Hotel Suisse, kept by a German.

The same day they went in a boat up the river Samava, to Rybalsk, seven
miles, to see a German schoolmaster named Schreitel, to whom they had a
letter of introduction. This is a colony of twenty-five families, founded
in 1788: the schoolmaster, who was also the minister, received them in a
brotherly manner. It was here that their mission properly commenced. From
this place a succession of German colonies extend in a south-easterly
direction to the Sea of Azov. The villages are all built on the same
pattern, being formed of one straight street of neat houses on both sides,
adorned with trees in front and gardens behind. The German colonists
consist principally of Mennonites and Lutherans. The former are the most
numerous and thriving; they were invited to settle there by Catherine the
Great, in order to improve the state of agriculture; but their example has
not had the desired influence on the surrounding districts. Although his
German neighbor is in an infinitely better condition than himself, the
Russian peasant will not imitate the husbandry which is practised so
successfully before his eyes.

At Rybalsk, John Yeardley had a Scripture reading and a religious
opportunity with a few serious persons who came to the house; and the next
evening he held a meeting for worship with the colonists.

On the 3rd, they left for Neuhoffnung. They travelled in a covered
carriage, which, though without springs, was a great improvement on their
last vehicle. They came the first day as for as Konski, where they passed
the night, sleeping in the carriage, the air being very mild the night
through. In the afternoon they arrived at another Mennonite colony,
Schoenweise, where they had a short interview with Pastor Obermanz and a
few of his flock. These people produce a small quantity of silk. The
travellers were now on the Steppes; they found them very thinly peopled,
so that all the country out of sight of the villages appeared like a vast
desert. On the 4th they passed through three colonies--Gruenthal, Priship,
and Petershagen. The settlers here are from all parts of Germany, mostly
from Prussia and Wuertemberg. Next came Halbstadt, the seat of the Bishop,
and Alexanderwohl, where the Friends passed the night. They were
surrounded by a large number of settlements on all sides.

These were the places where, according to his previous impressions and
apprehension of duty, John Yeardley was to have entered on that work of
gospel-labor to which he had so long looked forward. But, instead of
finding, as on former occasions of a similar kind, his heart enlarged and
his mouth opened to preach the word, he seems now to have felt himself
straitened in spirit, and to have been obliged to pass in silence from
colony to colony, a wonder perhaps to others, a cause of humiliation to
himself. Never before, in all his many journeyings, had such a trial
befallen him; and it may be supposed that, coming so soon after the
copious and unrestrained exercise of his gift which he had experienced in
Norway, it would press upon him with peculiar force. The people to whom he
was now come, seem, it is true, to have been in a different state from the
simple-hearted Norwegians, who thirsted for the "pure milk of the word;"
and their comparative indifference to spiritual things may have been a
main cause of the silence which he felt to be imposed upon him. With the
reserve natural to him, he has left but little clue to the motives and
feelings under which he acted. Great must have been the relief when, as
happened on several occasions, his bonds were loosened, and the command
was renewed to speak in the name of his only-loved and gracious Lord.

On the 5th they passed through several colonies to Gnadenfeld, where, says
J.Y.:--


We halted to breakfast with one of the colonists, and found him a
sweet-spirited man, and his family pious. His name is David Voote. He
appreciated the object of our mission, and spoke of the awakening that
had taken place of late; telling us that devotional meetings had been
established, but that some of their preachers did not approve of them. We
sent for one of the ministers, with whom I was pleased; he invited us to
hold a meeting with them on a future occasion if we could make it accord
with our journey, which I hope will be accomplished.

We obtained some information respecting the Molokans, and were directed to
Nicolai Schmidt in Steinbach, who often has communication with them. We
found him a delightful man, quite of the right sort to be useful to us. As
the Molokans speak nothing but Russ, we shall be in want of an interpreter
in our visit to them. I told him he must go with us; and he immediately
said. I will go with pleasure; whenever you return here and incline to go,
I will be at home and will accompany you. This seemed an opening of
Providence, and removes one great difficulty in the way of a visit to this
people, for whom I have felt more than towards any others in South Russia.
N. Schmidt is a wealthy farmer, and sets himself at liberty to promote the
extension of the Saviour's kingdom; I felt at once at home with him as a
friend and brother.


From Steinbach, which lay a few versts out of the direct road, they
proceeded to Stuttgardt, and the next day, the 6th, to Neuhoffnung, where
they were accommodated at a farmer's, and had the comfort of a good clean
apartment and kind attention to their wants. This is the principal seat of
the German Lutheran colonists.


On Seventh-day, says John Yeardley, we attended the school-children's
meeting, about 200 present. After Pastor Wuest had questioned on or
explained the Scriptures, I had an opportunity to address them. On
First-day afternoon we held an appointed meeting [with Wuest's
congregation], which was not large, on account of many [with the Pastor
himself] having to attend an interment in the neighborhood. After the
meeting we received a salutation from some of the young sisterhood, who
came to us and surprised us with their sweet melodious voices, singing in
concert a hymn well suited to our present situation. After they had ended
I went out and had a long conversation with them.

In all my journeyings, he touchingly continues, I was never so much cast
down as in this scene of labor; I never before so much missed the help and
consolation of my precious one as I now do; but, blessed be a gracious
God, she is safe with Him, and free from a toil which she could never have
endured. I marvel, and praise his great name for upholding me thus far; I
am astonished at the way in which I am enabled to bear the hardships of
this journey, and am preserved in health. It is the doing of my gracious
Saviour, and I thank him out of a grateful heart. Should I never be
permitted to return to my earthly home, I have a joyful hope he will take
me to a glorious rest with himself and with those I have so tenderly loved
on earth.


On the 8th, William Rasche went to Berdjansk, on the Sea of Azov, to
change some English money, and to inquire if there were any religious
people there. He met with some interesting persons, who seemed at first to
be prejudiced against the Friends but after some conversation became very
loving, and desired he would bring J.Y. to see them the next day.
Accordingly, on the 9th, J.Y. and W.R. went to Berdjansk, accompanied by
Pastor Wuest and several others. The meeting which they went to attend was
held in a private house. It commenced in the usual manner, with singing;
after which, ---- Buller read a chapter, and the pastor commented upon it;
and then they asked J.Y. what he had to say regarding it. He answered by
giving his view of the subject, and afterwards addressed them in the
ministry. Various individuals then related their experience, one after the
other, as is usual in the more private religious meetings in these
churches.


---- Buller (writes J.Y. in recording this meeting) is an interesting
man; I had much conversation with him as to his own conversion. It seems
to have been a work of the Spirit, without, in the first instance, any
other instrumentality than reading the Bible. I met several pious persons
in the meeting-room, and held converse with them to mutual comfort. They
are simple and sincere. We took tea in the garden after the meeting, and
did not reach our lodging in Neuhoffnung until 12 o'clock the same night.


10_th_.--This morning they started for Elizabethsdorf, accompanied by
Robert Lehmkuhle, a teacher from Kharkov. Their way lay entirely through
the boundless steppes, where so many ways ran into each other that the
driver missed the road, and they wandered about until 10 p. M., when they
took shelter at a German colonist's. The inmates, who had gone to rest,
rose to give them milk and bread.

The next day they proceeded to Elizabethsdorf, being escorted on the way
by hospitable members of the settlements through which they passed. At
Elizabethsdorf they were received by schoolmaster Seib, a brotherly
Christian man, whose conversation was "seasoned with grace."


After tea, says John Yeardley. we held a devotional meeting, in which I
had an opportunity to address the little company; but the people generally
in the colonies are busy till late in the evening. Being much weary with
our jolting journey, I retired to the waggon for the night, as I supposed;
but W.R. soon came to inform me that a number of young persons, men and
women, were come, it being as early as they could be liberated from their
day's labor, to have some of our company. I sprang from the waggon with
joy, and we had a delightful meeting, with a pretty large company. They
sang repeatedly, and betweentimes I related to them something of my
travels in Germany and Greece, with which they appeared wonderfully
pleased. We were all served with tea out of doors, and the company
remained together till after eleven o'clock, and then returned joyfully
home.

I was much pleased with Seib. He and another schoolmaster, named Kapper,
have been dismissed from their office of teacher, because of their holding
private meetings and preaching in them, or explaining the Scriptures. Some
of the Lutheran ministers are so lifeless that they will not allow the
people to meet in private for their edification. The dead persecute the
living, and light struggles with darkness. This is even the case in some
districts among the Mennonites. The ministers fear that their people
should go before them in religious light. The more I see of the _one-man
system_, the more I prize the gospel liberty in my own beloved
religious Society.


They returned to Neuhoffnung, and on the 13th went to Nicolai Schmidt's at
Steinbach.


Attended the meeting there in the morning, and at Gnadenfeld in the
evening, in both which places opportunity was given me to communicate what
was in my heart for the people.


The settlements of the Molokans, consisting of three villages, each of
about a thousand inhabitants, lie to the south of the German colonies.
These people are native Russians and seceders from the Russo-Greek church;
they receive their name from the word _Moloko_, milk, because they
drink milk on fast-days, which is forbidden by the national religion. The
Steppes are their Siberia, to which they have been banished. Their worship
is simple, commencing with silence and prayer, and they do not use the
ceremonies and discipline common among most other Christians; but they are
firm believers in the Christian faith, and many of them are
spiritually-minded people.

On the 15th John Yeardley and William Rasche, under the conduct of N.
Schmidt, left Neuhoffnung to visit the Molokans. The first village they
came to was Novo-Salifks, a prosperous colony in worldly matters, but said
to be behind the others in spiritual life. At the next, Wasilowkov, they
met with Terenti Sederhoff, the apostle of the Molokans, whose remarkable
history J.Y. related in a tract called _The Russian Peasant_, forming
No. 12 of his series. Here they also met with A. Stajoloff, who remembered
William Allen's visit in 1819. Sederhoff accompanied them to the third
village, Astrachanka, where they had a conversational meeting with several
of the chief men, but the intercourse was carried on at a double
disadvantage.


They spoke, says John Yeardley, nothing but Russ. T never regretted more
the want of the language. Schmidt had a manifest unwillingness to
interpret all I wanted to say, because it did not accord with his own
sentiments, and he feared it might strengthen the people in those views
from which the Mennonites would draw them. There was a precious feeling
over us, and I felt assured they appreciated our motive in visiting them;
they often pressed my hand when comparing Scripture texts on which we were
of one mind. I felt satisfied in having done what I could to direct them
in the right way, and to strengthen them in it. They are well read in the
Scriptures.


The travellers passed the night at this village, sleeping as usual in
their carriage; and the next day, taking a loving leave of their friends,
directed their course over the steppes into the Crimea. Here they found
themselves in the heart of the Tartar country, beyond the verge of
civilized life.


The Tartar villages, says John Yeardley, are the meanest possible,
consisting sometimes of mere holes dug in the earth, or huts standing a
little above the ground. The men wear wide drawers with the pink shirt
over them; the women have a chemise reaching to the calf of the leg, dirty
and coarse, an apron round the waist, sometimes so scanty or so ragged
that it will not meet, and a handkerchief tied in a slovenly manner on the
head. In these three articles of dress they drive the horses and oxen; the
sun burns them to a dark brown, almost black. The children we saw were
quite naked. Various attempts have been made to civilize and instruct
them, but without success. One missionary pursued the work so far as to
feed and clothe the children, and collect them for instruction, which they
received for a while, but all at once and with one consent it was at an
end. When I see the Tartar galloping over the steppe as if riding on the
wind, it constantly makes me think of the wild Arabs. When we are anxious
to find a well of water where we may take our meal, and when we see
travellers assembled to water their cattle and flocks, and the camels
running loose on the steppes--which they do till autumn, when they are
sought up for work,--all reminds us of customs of the East.

This evening they halted at a Tartar village, where the occupant of the
_traktir_, or house of entertainment, persuaded the driver to take
out his horses for the night. The conduct of this man and his companions
was suspicious; they eagerly examined the mattresses of the travellers,
which were of superior quality; and when William Rasche came to make the
tea, which he did by the moonlight outside the hut, the boiling water
which he poured in to rinse the teapot came out into the tumblers a white
liquid; and after the tea was put in the innkeeper held up the pot against
the moon, and looked curiously into it. Instead of retiring early, as the
Tartars always do, the men in the hut kept a watch upon the travellers;
and the suspicions even of the driver were awakened, when one of them came
to him, as he was lying by his horses, to borrow his knife. His horses,
however, were so weary, and he himself so unwilling to move, that the
travelers contented themselves with harnessing the horses, and making
ready to depart in case of necessity. Soon after midnight, finding they
were still watched by the Tartars, and apprehending that these waited only
till they should all be asleep, to carry off their horses or to rob their
persons, they decided to make the best of their way out of their hands.
The driver being slow to move, W.R. jumped into his place, seized the
reins, and drove quickly off, thankful to have effected a safe escape. It
is very common for the Tartars to prowl about in the night, and steal the
horses and waggons, of their more settled and thrifty neighbors.

After about three hours' driving, the moon shining so bright that they
could see to read by it, they arrived at another village, of a less
suspicious character.

On the 18th they reached Simpheropol, where they were glad to rest. The
next day they wished to visit Pastor Kilius of Neusatz, to whom they had
an introduction: as they were considering how they should get to him, he
opportunely came to the hotel. He introduced them to several estimable
persons, and took them the next day to his dwelling, situate in a
picturesque mountain village, twenty versts from the city. At Neusatz
commences another chain of German colonies, settled by the Evangelical
Lutherans. The next morning they attended the public worship, and in the
afternoon the Scripture-teaching for the children. On the 22nd they went
to Zuerichthal, a village formed of well-built houses, but where they found
the school in a very low state. The 23rd they started early for the Sudag
colony, intending to spend the time there until the departure of the
steamer for Odessa; but they found nothing to interest them in this
settlement, and accordingly proceeded to Feodosia, (or Kaffa,) a
watering-place on the south coast of the Crimea. The German inns in this
place were all full, and to procure a wholesome lodging, the; drove the
next day four miles among the hills, where they hired a large apartment at
the house of a German. The situation was romantic, with an extensive
prospect over sea and mountains; and on the hill-side was a thicket,
forming a delightful bower, where John Yeardley and his companion "live by
day, walked, talked, reposed, and wrote." In this retreat, breathing cool
air and quietude, J.Y. received the physical refreshment he so much
needed, while he reviewed the course of his laborious journey.
Notwithstanding his discouragements, he was able to cast all his burden
upon his Saviour, with whom he seems to have dwelt in nearer communion as
his day on earth went down.


8 _mo_. 26.--This morning I felt more sweet union with my God in
spirit than for a long time; and a strong desire has arisen to live in
closer communion with Jesus, the beloved of my soul, the only access to
the Father--the only place of rest, safety, and true _peace_. I long
more than ever not to be troubled with cross occurrences over which I have
no control, and which have too long perplexed me and disturbed my inward
peace. I long more than ever to spend my few remaining days on earth as
with my God in heaven, to refer everything to Him, and to pray more
earnestly and diligently for his grace to preserve me near to himself
under _all_ circumstances, until he shall have prepared me to be
taken to heaven, to join the happy company there in a blissful eternity.
"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because
he trusteth in thee."--Isa. xxvi. 3.

On the 1st of the Ninth Month they sailed to Odessa, where they had to
remain eight days. In this city they received a visit from a pastor, who
conversed with them on the work of the heavenly kingdom then going on in
the Bast, especially in Constantinople and Asia Minor.


The Saviour's kingdom, writes John Yeardley, in allusion to this
conversation, is spreading, and many instruments are being raised up in
various nations to help forward the great work. The kingdom of Satan is in
danger; he sees it, and stirs up the jealousy of men, setting them against
one another, and, by their seeking through party-spirit to exalt their own
particular religion, hindering the Lord's work. Into whatever nation the
beams of the Sun of Righteousness shine, the inhabitants begin to inquire
the way to Zion, and turn their faces thitherward. This alarms the rulers
whose kingdom is of this world.


From Odessa to Constantinople they had a quick and safe passage. At
Constantinople John Yeardley was deeply interested in the institutions
which the American missionaries have founded for the religious and
temporal improvement of the Armenians. He visited two of these, the high
school at Bebek and the girls' seminary at Has-keui, both beautifully
situated on the shores of the Bosphorus. In the former they found
forty-eight young men,--sixteen Greek and thirty-two Armenian. The
industrial part of the education was particularly gratifying to him.


Cyrus Hamlin, he says, who has the superintendence of their studies and
labor, is wonderfully adapted for his vocation. He is assisted only by
native teachers. The young men looked serious: some of their countenances
were peculiarly impressive, indicating that they had been with Jesus. I
saw them assembled in the school-room, and addressed them for some time;
and C. Hamlin most willingly interpreted into Armenian what I said. It was
a sweet and memorable time. The Armenian teacher would scarcely let go my
hand after the meeting, he had been so touched with the power of divine
love. In the girls' boarding-school we found twenty-five girls, all
Armenians, with the exception of two or three Greeks. It was a lovely
sight to see so many of this class under a course of religious and useful
instruction. Many of the countenances were marked and pleasing, and were
_fixed_ on me with great apparent seriousness while I addressed them,
along with some of the neighbors.----Everett (the conductor of the school)
kindly and most willingly interpreted what I had to communicate. He and
his wife have also a day-school for boys and girls. I consider these
institutions as bright and hopeful spots in the East, from which much
good may arise.


The persevering and well-directed efforts of the American missionaries for
the evangelization of the Armenians, and the field of Christian labor
which was thus opened, took firm hold of J.Y.'s mind; he longed to visit
the schools and congregations in Isnik and Brusa, and probably only
abandoned the journey at this time in the hope of undertaking it at some
future day. John Yeardley describes Constantinople as--


Built entirely on the hills which slope from a considerable eminence down
to the Bosphorus. The trees towering among the houses, the high spires and
gilded domes, have a most imposing effect; but what is the astonishment of
the traveller when he commences his ascent up steep, narrow,
clumsily-pitched streets. I could only compare them to the
worst-constructed bridle-roads in England which the packhorses traversed
centuries ago. The three days we were in the city I only saw one or two
carriages,--the most curious vehicles; indeed, there is scarcely a street
in which two carriages can pass. Donkeys are the chief carriers. As to
dogs, they are born and bred in the streets and are the property of the
town, and in the day-time He by dozens in the streets, young and old, are
always under the feet of the traveller, and he must constantly poke them
out of the way with his stick; by night they are furious. The shops
present a jumble of all kinds of wares; and the Turks sit cross-legged in
the window, or work at their trade inside.


They left Constantinople on the 15th, and on the 17th went on shore at
Smyrna, where, at the house of the American missionary Ladd, they met with
another missionary, named Stacking, returning with his family from Persia,
where he had labored sixteen years among the Nestorians. The account which
he gave John Yeardley of the creed and condition of the Nestorian Church,
and of the schools which had been opened in Persia, aroused his deep
sympathy and produced an abiding impression on his mind.

Smyrna, like the other Turkish cities which they saw, vividly impressed
the travellers with its Oriental character.


Like Constantinople, says J.Y., it is a town of all nations. The streets
are narrow, with a run of dirty water down the middle. We met docile
camels in great number, bringing figs from the interior. In the
fig-market were thousands of boxes being prepared and packed for
exportation. It is a sight of interest to see Turks, Greeks, &c., huddled
together, walking, talking, or sitting cross-legged and smoking their long
pipes. We took donkeys and ascended the hill, where we obtained a good
view of the town, and then examined the ruins where the ancient city
stood, and saw the place where the message from Heaven was received by the
angel of the church of Smyrna. The church of Polycarp stood not far from
that of John the Baptist. After a visit of peculiar interest, I returned
to the steam-ship and read the message to the church of Smyrna, which gave
rise to more reflections than I can here record.

Steaming on the sea of Marmora, (to continue J.Y.'s narrative of his
homeward journey), the Bosphorus and the Greek waters, was very pleasing.
We had a good sight of the walls of ancient Troas, where the apostle Paul
received the message in vision from the man of Macedonia, to come over and
help them. The quarantine prevented us from landing at Syra; but I
conveyed a note through the English Consul to my old friend Hildner, who
came alongside our steamer. I learned from him that Argyri Climi was five
years in his school, and usefully filled the office of teacher of the
higher classes; had been married about ten years to a lieutenant in the
army; had three children, and was living happily with her husband at the
Piraeus. It appears she retains her religious principles.

21_st_.--Arrived at Malta. Ours is the first steamer that has reached
the island since the removal of the quarantine; we went on shore directly
after breakfast. Isaac Lowndes was rejoiced to see me. We met in the
street, and he conducted us to his house. He has been in Malta seven
years, acting for the Bible Society; he gives no bright account of among
the Greeks, as to spiritual religion, nor of the island generally. The
present governor has admitted the Jesuits into the island, who are doing
mischief; privileges are being granted to the Romanists to the prejudice
of the Protestants; and a regulation has been proposed which would subject
a Protestant to six months imprisonment for not taking off his hat when he
meets the procession of the Host.


Isaac Lowndes took John Yeardley and William Rasche to visit Selim Aga,
or, as he was named after baptism, Edward Williams; who with his wife,
sister-in-law, and four children, formed an interesting Christian
household. J.Y. published the history of this man in No. 13 of his series
of tracts, _Turkey and the Converted Turk_, where also he has
depicted several scenes from the latter part of this journey.

Arriving at Marseilles, they proceeded quickly on to Nismes. It was with a
gush of natural sorrow that J.Y. revisited a place whore he had often
sojourned with his beloved wife.


The thought, he writes, of the difference in my circumstances now and when
last in this place fills me with sorrow. The beloved one of my bosom, then
the stay and solace of my heart, is no more with me to help and comfort me
in the toils of life. Yet when I consider what a large amount of suffering
she has escaped, I cannot but rejoice that she is at rest with her God and
Saviour, where I humbly hope soon to meet her. Lord, prepare thy unworthy
worm for that awful but joyful day!


John Yeardley held a small public meeting at Nismes, and the next day, the
3rd of the Tenth Month, set out for the bathing-place of Bagneres de
Bigorre, in the Pyrenees. His principal reason for going there was to
recruit his shattered health. "On our arrival at Nismes," he says, "and
during our few days' sojourn there, I began to feel the effects of my
long, toilsome Russian journey; and, in the hope of preventing a return of
my suffering complaint, I thought it justifiable to make trial of the
sulphur baths and water of Bagneres." But he had also another object in
view: "I had long thought," he adds, in a letter from Bigorre, "whether
there was not a seeking people in this neighborhood, and now I think there
is."

His first care on arriving at Bigorre, was to call on Pastor Frossard,
formerly of Nismes, who feelingly reminded him of the changes which had
happened to each of them since they had met before. He proposed to John
Yeardley to meet some Christian friends at his chapel. This was just what
J.Y. had been wishing for. The meeting was held; and after it was over he
gave the company an account of his travels in Russia, with which they were
highly gratified.

In a letter to his sister, Mary Tylor, which he wrote from this place, is
the following characteristic sentiment:


Thy welcome letter duly readied me at Nismes, and drew forth my tender
sympathy for thee and your whole circle in the loss of a kind and beloved
brother. It is another link taken from the family chain, and the shorter
it becomes the nearer we are drawn together in the bond of affection. How
the spirit seems to ascend with those loved ones who are taken from us,
and from earth to heaven! Our desire for a blissful eternity becomes more
ardent, because they have already entered upon it; but above all, we
desire to be with Him in whom we shall be one, and all will be glory.


Returning to Nismes, he occupied himself with holding meetings in many
places in that neighborhood. In some meetings which he attended in the
city, he had for fellow-laborers Eli and Sybil Jones, from the United
States, with their companions. Amongst the audience at one of these
meetings were three soldiers, who, with two others, had been awakened at
Lyons, and who manifested the progress they had made in Christian doctrine
by refusing to kneel before the procession of the Host. Their officer
observing their disregard of this required practice, held his sword over
the neck of one of them, saying he would strike off his head if he did not
bow down. The man was firm in his refusal, and was sent to prison. To
encourage one another in their new profession, these men were accustomed
to keep religious meetings. They were in consequence accused of sedition,
and when they asserted the simply religions character of their meetings,
one of them was required to swear to the truth of his statement; he
refused to take an oath, pleading that the New Testament commanded him not
to swear. A second was then called upon in the same way; he also refused;
and their stedfastness was reported to the commanding officer as an act of
contumacy. The officer happened to be a Protestant, of an enlightened and
pious disposition; he said that soldiers were called upon to vindicate the
innocence of their companions, not to procure their condemnation, and that
if they did not choose to give evidence the law would not compel them. Two
of the five received their discharge from the army; the rest were removed
to Nismes. John Yeardley had some conversation with these three after the
meeting, with which he was well satisfied. They told him that when they
were awakened they wrote and received so many letters that it excited
suspicion, and that the police who examined the letters took the texts of
Scripture, or rather the figures that referred to the chapters and verses,
for a secret language, used to deceive their vigilance.

On the 8th of the Eleventh Month, J. Yeardley and W. Rasche, accompanied
by Jules Paradon, went to Valence, and visited Bertram Combe, at Pialoux,
where they remained a few days. B.C. had fitted up a commodious room
adjoining his own dwelling, where he held meetings regularly:--


And where, says J.Y., we had several solemn and edifying occasions; and as
our being there became more known the attendance increased, so that the
last gathering was quite a large one, and peculiarly quiet and
satisfactory. Among some meetings which we appointed in the neighborhood
two were held in the _temple_ of the Protestant Church, which was a
mark of great liberality; these two occasions were peculiarly favored. In
the latter B.C. alluded to the persecution he had had to endure on account
of the disuse of the Supper and Baptism. He boldly avowed the conviction
he felt as to the non-use of these things, and that the preaching of the
gospel ought to be free. I have seldom been in a district where there is
more openness for the gospel message in its simplicity, than in this
mountain region.


From Valence, John Yeardley returned direct to England, only stopping at
Friedrichsdorf. where he visited the boarding-school.


I reached my home, he says, on the 24th of the Eleventh Month, with a
thankful heart to my Heavenly Father for his merciful preservation.




CHAPTER XX.


FROM HIS RETURN FROM RUSSIA TO HIS LAST JOURNEY.

1853-1858.

John Yeardley had scarcely returned to England before war was declared
with Russia. The confirmation he received from this lamentable event, that
his journey had been made at the opportune time, filled his heart with
gratitude. The work he had been able to do had been small, but he had the
satisfaction of knowing that it had been accomplished at the only juncture
in which it would have been practicable.


The year 1853, he writes, closed with many mercies to a poor unworthy
servant. I consider it a great blessing to have accomplished the visit
through Russia and to Constantinople before the horrible war broke out.
What a frightful state are things in at the present moment!--no access
could be had to those countries.


In the Spring of 1854 he spent some time at Bath. He attended, whilst
there, a public meeting appointed by Sarah Squire, in which he had a
testimony to offer in the gospel. Hearing afterwards that a military man
who was present had been brought to conviction by the doctrine which had
been declared, J.Y. noted in his Diary the subject on which he had
preached.


4 _mo_. 2.--I recollect, he says, alluding to the awful state of the
times in which we live, and the need of a refuge in God, and the
blessedness of the consolations of the Holy Spirit in a time of trouble.
That the Spirit of God was the first agent in the work of man's salvation,
bringing to the Saviour who died for sinners: the Father drawing to the
Son, the Son perfecting the work, and presenting each member of the living
church without spot or wrinkle to the Father. Blessed unity of Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit! The Father creating, the Son redeeming, the Holy
Spirit sanctifying.


In making a brief note of the Yearly Meeting this year, John Yeardley
takes occasion to record his sentiments on a subject which then, as now,
strongly engaged the attention of the Society.


The Yearly Meeting has been a precious time; it has strengthened the bond
of love and unity. There is, under all discouragements, a love to the
Society manifested in the young people of both sexes. It is true there is
a great want of bearing of the cross, and many are seeking for excuses to
persuade themselves that many of those things that have long distinguished
our Society are now no longer of use. But I still think there is more
religion in many of our young members than their outward appearance would
authorize us to believe. I love to cleave to the good, and to hold out a
helping hand to encourage the tender budding of grace, and for the good to
overcome the evil. I want them to be brought to conviction, and to be told
that they are not required to wear plain clothes, and to use plain speech,
because our Friends have done so, but because Christianity leads into
simplicity, and the language of Scripture is that of truthfulness, and to
follow the changing fashions of the world is too low for the notice of the
Christian whose heart is placed on heavenly things, and whose time is too
precious to be spent on trifles. There is no peace to the regenerated
heart equal to a devotedness of life in promoting the extension of the
Saviour's kingdom upon earth.


He soon after alludes to the Memoir of Joseph John Gurney, then just
published, and to the sharp stimulus which he received from its perusal--a
stimulus which minds fixed upon improvement always receive from the vivid
representation of time and talents diligently employed.


6 _mo_. 16.--Many of my solitary moments are cheered, and I am
greatly edified, in reading J.J. Gurney's Memoirs. It is a real privilege
to be introduced into the daily walk of the life of a Christian man with
such an enlightened and enlarged mind, whose expansive heart is filled
with love for the whole human race. Strengthened by faith, and filled with
the unction of the Spirit, his life was devoted to doing good to the
family of man, laboring for the conversion of sinners, and comforting
believers.

The diligence of J.J. Gurney in study, &c., has stimulated me to renew the
reading of the Greek New Testament, but I sink into the dust when I see
what he accomplished in comparison of my own insignificance. It is,
however, a comfort to know that I have a merciful Lord, who will not
require of me the exercise of gifts that I have not received. O that I may
he more faithful in the employment of the capacity which has been
entrusted to me, for the good of souls and the honor of my Lord!


The reflections which follow add another to the numberless testimonies of
the saints' experience, that the Christian life is a continual warfare.


I am sensible of having lost ground for some time past for want of more
diligence in watchfulness and prayer. I have been deeply sorry for it, and
I do hope my compassionate Lord has forgiven me. As a proof of his
forgiveness, I am permitted to enjoy once more the smiles of his
countenance, which cheer my lonely walk. How greatly do I long for more
intimate communion with the Beloved of my soul, the precious Saviour! Lord
_preserve_ me in _every moment_ of _temptation_, and make
me more entirely thine! Grant me more confidence in the immediate action
of thy Spirit in the ministry of the word, that my communications of this
nature may be deep and clear, and under the unction of thy Holy Spirit.
_Amen_!

6 _mo_. 23.--This morning I have been favored, more than usual, in my
endeavor to pour out my soul before God in prayer, in desiring more purity
of heart, more faith; and that it might please my compassionate Lord to
sustain and console me in my solitary lot, and preserve me faithful to the
end of the race. Many relatives and near friends were brought to my
remembrance, whom I endeavored to present to the mercy of a merciful God.


In the same diary is an appropriate notice of Dr. Steinkopf, and a tender
tribute to the memory of Martha Yeardley.


The other evening was spent at J. and M.C.S.'s with Dr. Steinkopf. "The
hoary head" of this aged and experienced Christian is as "a crown of
glory," for "it is found in the way of righteousness." He is full of love,
speaking constantly out of a grateful heart of the mercies of his God.
Before parting he read a few verses, exhorted us and supplicated for us.

A little more than three years have fled away since my precious and
dearly-beloved M.Y. entered on a blissful eternity. How do I feel the loss
of her sweet, cheerful, and edifying society! Ever since her blessed
spirit fled from earth to heaven, she has never by night or day been long
absent from my thoughts. How often does my soul pant and pray for a
preparation of heart for that blissful state where she now is, near to her
precious Saviour, who redeemed her with his own blood. He enabled her to
serve him when on earth, and now she sings his praises in heaven. What a
charm did she impart to my daily life! Our pursuits were always one and
the same; and now what a desert I still have before me,--but it may be
very short.


In the Eighth Month, John Yeardley went to Minden on a visit to Ernst
Peitsmeyer, whose daughter Sophie had been for some time his kind and
cheerful companion, and who now, with her parents and other friends,
welcomed him again to Germany. Whilst at Minden he derived benefit from
the sulphur baths of the Klause, not far from the town.


The bath, he says, is one hour's gentle exercise on the saddle. The farm
where the spring is stands quite alone in the midst of a wood, and the way
to it is delightful,--much suited to my taste. Sophie rides sometimes with
me: it cheers me to have her trotting by my side.


The handful of inquiring persons at Obernkirchen, whom J.Y. visited on
his return from Norway, continued to claim his sympathy, and one First-day
he joined them at their usual place of worship.


It was, he writes, a refreshing time in this little meeting. When the
little company first met together they were dragged into the street by the
police; but they persevered, and, on making an appeal to the magistrate at
Rinteln, stated their case with so much simplicity that the government has
granted them liberty to meet together undisturbed. How marvellous, the
Friends are protected; and the Baptists, under the same government, are
persecuted with increasing rigor! No interference on their behalf has been
of the least use.--(_Dairy and Letter_.)


In the Fourth Month of 1855 John Yeardley received a certificate "to visit
his friends in Yorkshire, and to hold meetings with persons not in
church-fellowship" with Friends.


I arrived at Halifax, he says, in a letter of the 28th of the Fourth
Month, on Fifth-day evening, and attended the Monthly Meeting of Brighouse
on the 20th. It looked formidable to me in prospect on the first entering
into harness; but I hope the meeting proved a good introduction, and I saw
a good specimen of a large, harmonious, and well-conducted Monthly
Meeting. There might be near 250 members present.


When he had completed the service, he took a week of repose at Harrowgate,
where he briefly reviews his journey.


5 _mo_. 29.--In passing along through my native county, I found many
countenances missing which were very familiar to me years ago, and who are
now gone to their rest. But I was comforted to find in many places a race
of young people springing up who bore the marks of being plants of my
Heavenly Father's right-hand planting, and who gave hopes of becoming
useful in his Church. It is with a grateful heart that I record the mercy
of my Lord, in that he has granted me strength in a remarkable manner to
do what he put in my heart to do, from place to place. Blessed be his
name!

After having finished the service in Yorkshire, I have had a week's
tarriance at Harrowgate. The rest and quiet have proved beneficial to my
health, and very precious have been the seasons of sweet communion I have
been permitted to hold with my God in this retirement.


This summer he repeated his visit to Minden, and hired a lodging at the
Klause. A reflection in one of the letters which he wrote from this
retreat affords a pleasing glimpse of his mind:--


I sometimes think that a large portion of comfort and joy are allowed to
those who really love the Lord; and how chastened are the pleasures of the
humble Christian! They abide with us long after the causes of them are
passed away; and the more our permitted pleasures are enjoyed under a
grateful sense of the goodness of the bountiful Giver, the longer they may
be permitted to us.


In the Ninth Month, he attended the Two-months' Meeting at Pyrmont. It was
not without emotion that he visited once more the place which had been so
familiar to him in earlier days. The hopes he had then conceived, and
which, as we have seen, he had so fondly cherished, with regard to the
Society of Friends in that part, had been disappointed; the little company
had dwindled in numbers and declined in religious influence; and when he
took leave of Pyrmont for the last time, it was with a sorrowful heart.

From Minden, accompanied by Sophie Peitsmeyer, he went southwards, and
took up his abode at the little town of Neuveville, on the Lake of Bienne,
in Switzerland.


I spent, he says, two or three days at Neufchatel, and visited many of my
old friends in the place and neighborhood; but it was affecting to find
how many of those I had known years ago were no longer on this earth.
Madame Petavel was as warm-hearted as ever; the professor, her husband,
is ripening for heaven.


John Yeardley had gone to Neuveville with the intention of passing the
winter in Switzerland. After remaining a month, however, he returned to
England; and this change of mind was the result of a remarkable
circumstance. He became silent and reserved, with the air and manners of
one who is not at peace with himself; until one night, when he was heard
to cry out in a loud tone, as though speaking to some one. The next
morning at breakfast he appeared subdued and full of tenderness; and on
his young friend inquiring what had made him cry out in the night, he told
her that he must return home, for there was more work for him to do. He
said that a prospect of service in the gospel had latterly opened before
him, and that as he had greatly desired to remain in Switzerland, he had
striven against the sense of duty and refused to yield; but that during
the night he had had a vision, in which he heard the command repeated to
return home and enter again upon his labor, and that he felt, as he
thought, the touch of the heavenly messenger's hand. This caused him to
call out; and when he awoke, he found that willingness of spirit had taken
the place of his former obstinacy. Thus turned from his own purpose, he
set about to accomplish the will of his gracious Master with his usual
resolution, and they made the best of their way back to England. The
nature of the service which he saw before him is touched upon in the
following passage from a letter, dated Neuveville, the 14th of the Tenth
Month.


My home duties press heavily upon me.... Very long have I thought about
the young men, and the younger part of our Society; and I have a hope the
way will be made for my finding access to them, in a religious and social
point of view. Should it be permitted, the Lord grant that it may tend to
mutual comfort.


John Yeardley returned through Paris. He spent a day or two in that great
city, which he never saw "so quiet and free from soldiers." We extract
from his Diary a short note of a conversation which took place at the
_table d'hote_ of the hotel where he lodged, and which appears to us
to be of an instructive character.

Two men contended respecting the motive by which mankind are influenced to
good actions. One attributed it to _reason_; the other held that it
was _virtue_ which restrains from evil and impels to good, and
maintained that we must do good actions from the love of justice and
virtue, and not from the fear of punishment or the hope of reward. The
latter had the advantage over his antagonist in the argument:--


I had not, says J.Y., taken part in the conversation; but at the close I
felt constrained to tell the _Christian_ that I confessed myself on
his side, because he had defended the truth; only that what he called
_virtue_, I called _the action of the spirit of God in the heart of
man_. With much animation, he clasped my hand in his, and cried,
"That is the very thing,--that is just what I mean!"


In the year 1856, he engaged in two religious visits at home, both of them
in accordance with the kind of service which had been unfolded to him in
the retirement of Neuveville, viz., mingled religious and social
intercourse with his younger fellow-members.

In reading the expression of his feelings in the prospect of the former of
these engagements, it is instructive to remark, that the same sense of
entire dependence which had bowed his spirit when required in early life
to make the first offering of this kind, was present with him when now
called upon to go forth in his Master's name for the twentieth time, and
when age and experience had given him reverence among men.


1 _mo_. 8.--To-morrow is our Monthly Meeting, when I expect to
propose to my Friends a visit to the meetings composing the Quarterly
Meetings of Bristol and Somerset, and Gloucester and Wilts. Every time any
fresh exercise turns up for me, it always feels as if it was the
_first_ time of entering into the holy harness. If my friends permit
me to proceed, I hope I shall be helped through it; but it looks
formidable.

21_st_.--Bristol is like a great mountain looking me in the face, and
weighing heavily upon my heart.


The following short memoranda of the way in which he was engaged at
Bristol are taken from his letters; the Diary, during his later years,
supplies few notes, either of his labors or his experience:--


3 _mo_.--I met at Richard Fry's house a large number of young men and
women teachers of the First-day School; forty-eight were present. An
opportunity was offered for my receiving and also communicating
information respecting schools and education. What makes the subject more
interesting in Bristol, is the attendance of more than one hundred of the
school children at meeting on First-day mornings, which, I think, has been
the practice for about ten years, and their behavior is orderly and good.

31_st_.--I am somewhat busily employed in this busy city in visiting
the young men. I find very ready access to them, and my engagement has the
hearty concurrence of all my friends. I am abundantly convinced that it
would have been a great mistake to have ran away from the place without
making the attempt at the performance of the present service. The usual
meetings for worship have been seasons of divine favor, some of them, I
think, extraordinarily so, which I consider a great mercy in my Heavenly
Father, when I consider the weakness of the poor instrument. It has been
announced for me to give a lecture this evening in the large
meeting-house, on my travels in Europe, a _sound_ which almost
frightens me. Friends really do not know what a poor thing I am.


By the kindness of a friend, we have been supplied with a pleasing
personal reminiscence of John Yeardley's visit to Bristol, which will help
to represent him as he was in later years.


Bristol, 6 mo. 8, 1859.

Since thou informed me of thy intention to compile a memoir of our late
dear friend John Yeardley, I have endeavored to recall the circumstances
of his visit to this city in the spring of the year 1856.

My impression is, that the most striking feature in his character was his
childlike simplicity, both in word and conduct. This very characteristic,
whilst it really increased his influence for good, especially with the
young, rendered it perhaps more difficult to trace, and now to describe,
the precise manner in which it was exercised. I believe that his Christian
labors here were very seasonable and very important, and that he was
enabled to perform a service which scarcely any one else would have been
equally qualified to render.

There was in him, so far as my observation went, no approach towards an
assumption of spiritual dignity; nor was there, on the other hand, that
which is perhaps a more frequent defect, anything of _feigned_
humility. His whole character seemed to me perfectly unaffected. To
whatever extent, therefore, his natural disposition may have fitted him
for profitable intercourse with the young, I think that the qualities
which I have attempted to describe rendered him peculiarly acceptable to
them. Many times, whilst he was amongst us, he alluded--I believe even in
his public ministry--to his delight in their society, somewhat in this
manner: "I love the company of those who tread the earth with an elastic
step." This prominent trait in his character was a striking illustration
of what may be termed _the corrective tendency_ of true religion, by
which in advanced life he was enabled to place himself, under the precious
influence of the love of Christ, in thorough sympathy with those whose
circumstances, in many respects, were so different from, his own.

But my object was to describe John Yeardley's meetings in Bristol. The
truth is, however, that in describing the man, one seems most truly to
describe his service. In addition to his family visits, he met a large
company of our members in our meeting-house, and gave an interesting
narrative of his journeys in Southern Russia and Greece. He afterwards
invited many of our young friends, especially those who were engaged as
teachers in our First-day Schools, to spend an evening with him. Meeting
at the house of a kind friend, we had an opportunity of hearing from his
own lips some interesting details of his labors, chiefly, I think, in
reference to the schools in Greece. With characteristic simplicity, he
made various inquiries respecting our own First-day Schools, in which he
felt a deep interest. The occasion was of a very sociable and easy
character, and well calculated to promote in his young friends the
_healthy tone_ of religious feeling which seemed so peculiarly to
belong to himself.


After Martha Yeardley's decease, and as years rolled on, his mind dwelt
still more habitually and more confidingly than ever on the approaching
end of the race.


4 _mo._ 24.--I cannot say my spirits are always high. There is an
individuality in the allotment of each of us which we must seek for grace
and aid to endure to the end. The road may be now and then a little rough,
but it cannot be very long, at least to some of us; and when the eye
closes under the last gleam of earthly light, and then opens in the full
brightness of eternal glory, to enjoy the fulness of a Saviour's love, it
will be bliss indeed.

Thinking his state of health unequal to the attendance of the Yearly
Meeting, he left London and again, resorted for a while to the baths near
Minden, where he passed two months in tranquil retirement. He had in
former visits been deeply interested in the sufferings of a Prussian
soldier who refused conscientiously to bear arms. The late Samuel Gurney
wrote to the King of Prussia, on behalf of the young man, who was in
consequence liberated from military service, but was sentenced to two
years' imprisonment. The term was not nearly expired; but John Yeardley,
whilst at Minden, heard that he had been released from prison by immediate
command of the King. J.Y. had "spent a First-day with him within the
gloomy walls in Duisburg," and was consequently the more ready to rejoice
in his liberation.

On his return to England, John Yeardley proceeded to Birmingham. His
service in this and the neighboring towns was similar to that which he had
had to perform at Bristol. He says:


By day I called on the sick and such as were confined at home. In the
evenings I met companies of young men and women. They were invited to the
Friends' houses where tea was first served, and then a religious occasion
of silence and exhortation, with supplication when felt to be under right
pointing. The remainder of the evening was spent in social converse. I am
very favorable to the mixing of social intercourse with gospel labor. All
seemed pleased, and I trust we were mutually edified. I was often
requested to give some account of my late journey and the state of
religion in the various countries where I had travelled; and the
conversation often, turned on points connected with our religious
principles.

Joseph Sturge, he continues, was from home. At the request of his wife I
dined at their house with twenty-five young culprits, whom J.S. has in his
Reformatory at Stoke, near Bromsgrove. They came in a van with horses to
spend the day. They are all such as have been once or twice in prison,
mostly for theft. I addressed them after dinner, and at tea-time I
questioned them as to Jesus Christ our Redeemer, on God, Heaven and Hell,
how to gain Heaven and avoid misery. I left them with a more favorable
impression than I otherwise should have had. Severe measures had failed to
improve them, but they seemed susceptible of kind treatment, and some of
them gave hopes of amendment.

9 _mo_. 21.--Visited the Boys' and Girls' First-day Schools.
Breakfasted with thirty teachers (young men) at the schools. About 370
boys present in two rooms. None are taken under fourteen years of age.
Also a large class of adults. I addressed the two companies: then went to
the girls; heard them read, and addressed them. There are about twenty
young women teachers, and perhaps 270 to 300 girls.

The morning meeting was large. I was much pressed in spirit to speak on
the nature of the fall of man, and on the necessity of having clear views
of gospel truth. I was told afterwards that there was a Unitarian present.


He attended the Quarterly Meeting at Leicester on the 24th, and the two
following days met companies of young persons, who were, he says, "much
tendered in spirit." After some similar service at Stourbridge and
Coventry, he returned on the 27th to Stamford Hill. He remarks in his
Diary: "I believe the service of the young Friends in the First-day
Schools has been a blessing to themselves as well as to their pupils."

The next month John Yeardley made a religious visit to Hertfordshire, and
had two social-religious meetings with the younger Friends at Hitchin;
after which he remained at home until the beginning of the Twelfth Month,
when he left England for Nismes.

One object in this journey was to revisit the school which had been
established by himself and Martha Yeardley in 1842: another was the
renewal of his declining health. Susan Howland and Lydia Congdon, from the
United States, who were then on a visit to Europe, were bound for the same
destination, and John Yeardley gave them his company.


12 _mo_. 6.--On entering France, he says, we found a sprinkling of
snow and frost, but on leaving Lyons we left all the wintry weather
behind, and travelled on under a hot sun, and bright, cloudless sky, which
seemed to impart to us all fresh vigor and spirits. S. Howland remarked,
In such an atmosphere she felt another being.

At Nismes, the party found Eliza P. Gurney, and Robert and Christine
Alsop, on their way home from the valleys of Piedmont. John Yeardley
lodged at the school, spent much of his time with the children, and with
the other English and the American Friends gave his aid in some plans for
their recreation.


12 _mo_. 25.--The evening of this day was a lively and pleasant
scene. The girls' countenances were brightened and their hearts cheered by
the presents made to them by the English Friends present. The "tree" was
new to them; it was beautifully lighted with tapers, and bore a variety of
fruit both for mind and body.

1857. 3 _mo_. 2.--My dear friend ----- proposed my giving the school
girls a treat before I left Nismes. We contrived a visit to the sea,
distant from Nismes about twenty miles. We procured two omnibuses with six
horses, and started at 5 o'clock in the morning. Long before the time
appointed, the little maidens were in the entrance-hall with their
satchels in their hand, containing each her dinner; twenty-seven in all.
The pleasure on the road was novel and great; but when they arrived at the
sea-shore their delight was complete; with light hearts and quick heels,
running and picking up shells, meeting the waves as they advanced and
receded. On our return we visited the ancient town of Aigues-Mortes, near
the sea, famous for having been the place where the Protestant women were
confined and punished even to death. We entered most of the strong and
gloomy cells, and saw the instrument of torture. The tower and fortress
are a perfect model of a feudal castle.


On his return to England, John Yeardley was taken ill with bronchitis,
which produced great bodily weakness, and caused him "many wearisome"
nights and days; but, he says, "my Saviour was near to console and sustain
me." He went for change to Bath, and afterwards to Brighton with Margaret
Pope:--


We made, he says, speaking of this visit many calls, and my hospitable
hostess had many of the Friends to tea and dinner visits. Our social
readings in the evening were often instructive in the conversation upon
what we read, particularly over Hippolytus, who lived and wrote in the
first half of the second century. The Chevalier Bunsen did good service to
the Christian Church in bringing the life and some of the writings of this
good man to light.


On his return home we find him still solicitous, as he had been in former
years, for the intellectual improvement of his young friends.


11 _mo_.--During my stay at home I have renewed my German class for a
few of my young friends. We have also commenced a soiree for German and
French conversation. I love the society of my young friends, and am
always, anxious to promote their learning to speak German and French.


The Diary for 1858, the last year of his life, commences with, a New
Year's dedication of himself afresh to the service of his faithful
Creator, and a prayer for a fresh anointing in the exercise of his
ministry.


1858. 1 _mo_. 4.--How many and various are the thoughts which crowd
on the mind on the commencement of a new year; perhaps none more important
than to think I am one year nearer to eternity. A desire does live in my
heart (cherish it, O, my God) to live more to thy glory on earth. How I
long to be favored with strength to do something for the cause of truth
and righteousness, so long as I may be permitted to remain on the Lord's
earth. I think with gratitude that he has blessed me with a little more
faith of late in my ministry, and my very soul prays that in these
requirings he may be pleased to put the unction of his Spirit into my
heart, and his words into my mouth, and that under a right pointing, they
may go forth with power. Grant me, Lord, more devotedness of life, and a
right and sure preparation for a peaceful death and a blissful eternity.


For some years before his decease, John Yeardley's thoughts were
frequently occupied with the subject of the Millennium. Like some other
good men, he thought he saw in the events which were taking place, the
impending accomplishment of those predictions, whose fulfilment was to
precede the "great and terrible day of the Lord." On one occasion, after
mentioning a number of these "signs of the times," he winds up the
enumeration and the thoughts to which it gave rise, with the following
reflection:--


Happy is the Christian who, in this time of conflict, can look beyond the
passing events of time to the Great First Cause, and behold, as with the
eye of faith, the providence of his God watching over all things, waiting
to bring good out of evil, and causing all things to work to the one great
point, when he will cause the wrath of man to praise him, and the
remainder of wrath will he restrain. "Come, my people, enter thou into thy
chambers and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself, as it were for a
little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For behold the Lord
cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
iniquity." (Isaiah xxvi. 20, 21)


In the Second Month he spent a week at Chelmsford with Susanna Corder. His
visit was prefaced by the following letter:--


Stamford Hill, 1 mo. 13, 1858.

MY DEAR FRIEND,

It would seem to me as if there were only left here and there a link of
the chain of my original connexion on this earth. The best end of this
chain is attached to those loved ones in heaven who are drawing me every
day nearer to their happy and blissful abode, through the love of our
glorified Redeemer. It is now many years since thou received her once so
dear to me as a bosom friend, to partake of thy wise counsels, and in her
troubles especially to enjoy the sympathy of thy warm and affectionate
heart.

I am now left alone for a short time; my young companion is at Norwich. If
thou wert at home, pretty well in health, and withal not so much occupied
as sometimes, it would be a great pleasure and gratification to me to pay
thee a short visit; but, as an absolute condition, I must request thee to
say, in perfect freedom, if it would be quite convenient. I want to ask
thee _many, many_ things.

Thy friend, affectionately and very sincerely,

JOHN YEARDLEY.


After his return home, having also visited Saffron Walden, he writes:--


1 _mo_. 25.--Just returned from a visit to Essex. I lodged a week at
my dear friend S.C.'s, and was edified and comforted in her company. It
has been a promised pleasure of some years' standing. The morning meeting
on First-day, as well as the one on Fourth-day, was a season of spiritual
refreshment, for which I was truly thankful. The Friends testified their
unity and comfort: I called on most of them.

On the Seventh-day, C.M. conveyed me across the country to Saffron Walden.
On the way we paid a sweet visit to the afflicted family of ----. At
Walden I was affectionately cared for, and was much interested in the
Friends there, whom I had not seen for eighteen years.




CHAPTER XXI.


LAST JOURNEY AND DEATH, 1858.--CONCLUDING REMARKS.

We are now arrived at the closing scene of John Yeardley's labors. The
impression which he had received, during his visit to Turkey in 1853, of
the opening for the work of the Gospel in the Eastern countries, had never
been obliterated; it had rather grown deeper with time, although his
ability to accomplish such an undertaking had proportionately diminished.
This consideration, however, could not satisfy his awakened sympathies,
and, according to his apprehension, no other course remained for him but
to prepare for a visit to the missionary stations in Asia Minor and the
countries beyond, in order to deliver to the inquiring inhabitants amongst
whom those stations are planted, the message of Christ's love to their
souls with which he believed himself to be charged. And when he
communicated to his friends the apprehension that this journey was
required of him as the last offering of thanksgiving before his day
closed, they were satisfied to "lay their hands upon him" for the work,
thinking, perhaps, that the veteran soldier could not better end his
campaign than with his arms in his hands, actively contending for the
faith. That such might not improbably be the issue of the enterprise, John
Yeardley himself believed; but it is doubtful if he correctly estimated
the arduous nature of the journey. It would have been a bold undertaking
in the vigor of his days: at his time of life, and with his declining
strength, it was, humanly speaking, impossible that he should accomplish
nearly all he had in view.

His Diary unfolds his spiritual exercises and his natural feelings in the
prospect before him.


3 _mo_. 17.--The last two months have been to me an awful time of
deep conflict of spirit, arising out of a prospect of a religious visit to
some places in Asiatic Turkey, and parts adjacent. I do not know when I
have had more conflict to arrive at a clear pointing. I prayed earnestly
and waited long for that clear pointing of Divine Wisdom, without which I
can never move in concerns of this importance. In the end, I am thankful
to say, the cloud was removed and the sun stone with brightness, and no
longer was my poor tried mind left in doubt as to the line of religions
duty; and before mentioning it to any one, I communicated it to the
Monthly Meeting in the Second Month. Much unity and sympathy were
expressed, and the certificate ordered. It is now signed, and is a sweet
document, short and explicit.

I see and deeply feel the perils and sufferings which await me, in
venturing on untrodden ground, as it regards any minister of our Society,
and to such a distance, and among, for the most part, an unbelieving
people. But I can and do look forward in calm confidence, trusting, as I
have ever done, in the aid and protecting care of my Heavenly Father,
whose cause I desire to serve, and whose will I wish above all other
things to do. My earthly career can never end better than in the work of
my Divine Master; and should it be his will to terminate my life in the
Arab tent, I shall have more consolation there than in an English home
under the stinging sense of a dereliction of my religious duty.

I am giving all my leisure hours to learn something of the Turkish
language, for travelling purposes, and for a little social intercourse.
Ever since this concern fastened on my mind, it has been connected with
having the company of my young friend from the South of France, Jules
Paradon.

May the Lord grant me resignation, faith, grace, and strength to do his
holy will; and then, whether it end in life or death, his great name shall
be praised. This testimony I record in gratitude and love to the mercy of
my God. Amen.


Before leaving England, he paid a visit to Staines.


4 _mo._ 20.--I went down to Staines, and spent two weeks with
Margaret Pope, which sojourn proved a strength and comfort to me. This
dear friend is a succorer of many, and, I can truly say, of me in
particular. We had several pleasant drives, and made friendly visits to
the neighboring meetings and Friends. I also applied pretty diligently to
the Turkish language.


Amply provided, by the kindness of many friends, with whatever could
administer to his wants or ease the roughness of Eastern travel, John
Yeardley left his home on the 15th of the Sixth Month. He arrived at
Nismes on the 17th, and was joined there by Jules Paradon. His Diary
supplies some notes of the voyage to Constantinople.


23_rd_.--Malta. Here we arrived at 4 o'clock this morning, after a
favorable passage; thanks to the Preserver of our lives; great is his
mercy and his love. My heart is filled with deep thoughtfulness, and I am
very anxious to procure an interpreter, either at Smyrna or
Constantinople. My faith is weak, but I trust the Lord will provide.

On descending the lower deck adjoining: the large saloon, I found my
faithful companion in calm but very earnest conversation with the
commissary of the ship and a passenger of respectability, the Spanish
consul of Smyrna. They had sifted from Jules the object of our journey,
and when they found it connected with a religious mission, they both
attacked him earnestly and showed themselves really opposed to the truth.
But my young friend stood his ground well, and maintained the Christian
religion. The opponents were both Romanists. They quieted down before the
close, and treated us respectfully the remainder of the journey; we parted
with them at Smyrna. I am thankful to have in my companion such a defender
of the faith.

27_th_.--We arrived at Smyrna this morning, and in order to meet some
of our Christian friends to whom we had letters of recommendation, we met
them after their worship. Edward Van Lennep, the Dutch consul, and his
brother Charles, the Swedish consul, received us with great kindness and
cordiality through the letters from one of our Members of Parliament. It
was very sweet to find these two brothers so imbued with religious
feeling; they gave their hearts to help us in our prospect.


On the 30th John Yeardley and his companion landed at Constantinople; they
found the heat and noise of the city very oppressive.


The people in the streets, says John Yeardley, are numerous beyond all
description; thousands, and tens of thousands, standing, sitting, running,
following, or pushing one against the other, talking and shouting in the
ceaseless noise of the Armenian, Turkish, Greek, Syriac, Italian, French
and English languages. The services of my dear Jules are most valuable: he
makes his way with every one through his earnest kindness to serve the
good cause.

When passing through the islands, he adds, the prospect was extremely
beautiful; but my mind was always anxious in the prospect of the long
journey before us; but the mercy of my God is great, and deeply humbles me
in thankfulness for his goodness.--(_Letter of_ 7 _mo_. 4.)


Very soon after their arrival, walking several hours in the heat of the
day, John Yeardley had a slight attack of sun-stroke. The effect appeared
quickly to pass off, and he was able to perform such religious duty as
opened before him in the city and its immediate neighborhood.


_Diary_. 7 _mo_. 4.--We made a call at Bebek: Dr. Hamlin had
gone to the city, but Dr. Dwight received us kindly. These two dear
Christian, friends called on us yesterday. This morning we attended the
meeting in the Armenian chapel, and at half-past 1 we had a full company
in the same meeting-house. They received in a free and brotherly
disposition what I was favored to express in gospel freedom; I concluded
in supplication. A kind and Christian man interpreted with simplicity into
the Turkish language. The morning service was in the Armenian. We have
already had many calls from these loving Christian friends in our hotel.
What a mercy, and how encouraging, to be thus received in gospel by
strangers!


Respecting this meeting Jules Paradon says:--


About thirty-five or forty were present. Our dear friend's communication
was short and simple; it breathed love to all. In fact, what he seemed to
have most on his mind in all his public communications was, to show his
hearers how much God loved them in even giving his own Son for them, and
the high privilege we can enjoy in loving him.


They went also to Has-Keui, where J.Y. desired to have a meeting with the
girls of the school; but many had left for the vacation, and he was
obliged to give up his intention.

On the 10th they went to Brusa, in Asia Minor, six hours by steam-vessel
across the Sea of Marmora to Moudania, and six on horseback from Moudania
to Brusa. The land journey was oppressive. A narrow path winds through a
very rugged country; and there is only one halting-place, a guard hut,
where they took a cup of coffee, the only refreshment the inmates had to
offer. John Yeardley suffered much in this day's journey.

He had two meetings in the Protestant meeting-house at Brusa:--


Both, says Jules Paradon, took place after the usual service, which was
expressly made short. The hearers, to the number of about 120, were
impressed and interested to hear and see our dear friend come from so far
to visit them in the love of the gospel. Twelve or fourteen men came two
evenings to see us at our lodgings; and on both occasions our dear friend
addressed them very sweetly. The heat tried him very much, but he felt
pleased and happy to be helped to sympathize with so many simple,
kind-hearted people.


At Demirdash (six miles from Brusa), he had a short religious opportunity
with a few persons.

On their return to Constantinople, finding that a box of luggage he
expected from London, containing a tent and other equipments, had not
arrived, without which he could not pursue his journey into the interior,
he employed the interval in visiting Isnik, (the ancient Nicomedia,) and
Bargheghik, two places in Asia Minor, not far from the coast. Accordingly
they started early the next day, and reached Isnik late in the evening,
weary and exhausted, having been able to procure very little refreshment
on the way. They proceeded to Bargheghik the day following; John Yeardley
walking about four miles in the middle of the day, with which he was
extremely fatigued.


He had a meeting, continues Jules Paradon, late in the evening, which
proved highly interesting. About thirty men and one woman attended. Our
dear friend encouraged and consoled the weak and the afflicted. The next
day we returned to Isnik, having to bear the heat of the sun from
half-past eight till three in the afternoon. We had a meeting the same
afternoon at half-past four, towards the close of which he felt weak, and
seemed to end his address rather abruptly.


The fact was, that paralysis had supervened; and on his return the next
day to Constantinople, his bodily and mental strength were seen to be
rapidly diminishing. He still clung, however, to the desire of
accomplishing the object which lay so near his heart, and could not be
satisfied without going to Bebek to consult his missionary friends about
his journey into the interior. Probably they perceived that he was totally
unequal to the effort, and advised him to relinquish it; for on his return
to the city he was induced to abandon the thought of proceeding farther,
and to turn his mind towards home. On the 23rd he said, If after what had
been done he was permitted to go home, it would be a satisfaction.[14]

On the 26th they embarked for Marseilles. John Yeardley bore the voyage
well, walking on deck every day, but becoming continually weaker. They
arrived at Marseilles on the 4th of the Eighth Month, and passed through
France as rapidly as his state would allow. On the evening of Second-day,
the 9th, he was favored to reach Stamford Hill; and though unable to
speak, he recognized several of his near relatives, and signified his
pleasure in being once more at home.

He continued to sink until Fifth-day, the 11th, when he quietly breathed
his last, an expression of peace resting on his venerable face. We may
say, with one of his most intimate friends on the Continent, when he heard
of his decease:--"So our beloved friend has been called to enter into his
Lord's joy. Now he will see God, to whom he often used to pray. 'With thee
is the fountain of life; in thy light shall we see light.'"

His remains were interred at Stoke Newington, on the 18th of the Eighth
Month.

       *       *       *       *       *


Of the fruits which John Yeardley has bequeathed to us in the history of
his life and Christian experience, none perhaps are of higher value than
his diligent improvement of the talents he possessed and his steady and
persevering pursuit of what he had in view. It is not so much what
abilities a man has that determines his place in society, and the amount
of his influence, as the use which he makes of them. Of this truth John
Yeardley was a striking example. We have heard him say, in one of his
early diaries: "I have clearly seen, for what service I am designed in the
church militant here on earth; therefore, through the assistance of divine
grace, I hope to pursue nothing but in subordination to this main design."
The service to which he was called was the Christian ministry; and, laying
aside every meaner ambition, and indeed every other object, he addressed
himself to preparation for this service as the labor of his life. He
cultivated those habits of mind and body, and confined himself to the
acquisition of those branches of knowledge, which, while they left his
heavenly gift free and unsullied, would best subserve the exercise of it.

His industry and perseverance were remarkable. In none of his pursuits
were these qualities more conspicuous than in his study of languages. It
cost him, especially, an almost incredible amount of labor to master
French. The slight elementary knowledge of this language which he acquired
at Bentham cannot have given him so much as an insight into it; his
acquaintance with it may be said to date from his visit to Congenies, when
he had reached his fortieth year. Yet, by indefatigable exertion,
maintained during many years, he became able to write and speak it
fluently, though, not correctly, and even to preach without an
interpreter. The difficulty which he encountered in the acquisition of
languages, from the late period of life at which he commenced, was
enhanced by his ignorance of Latin, that best trainer of the youthful
faculties, and by a natural inaptitude for the memory of words. A proof of
the latter occurred when, with his quick-witted wife, he was occupied in
conning over the Italian and Modern Greek Grammars, in preparation for
their journey to the Ionian Islands. The difference in their natural
capacities in this respect is shown in her playful expression; "I got my
lesson in half an hour; while John has been three or four hours over his,
and does not know it yet."

But although slow in study, he was quick and shrewd in the observation of
actual life. This was apparent in his daily converse; and it may also be
continually traced in his Diary, where, describing those with whom he
became acquainted in his numerous travels, he seizes, on the prominent
feature of their mind or manners, and with a word affixes to each his own
particular mark. Of the hundreds of individuals who rise into view one
after another in the course of these journeys, scarcely two are alike; a
result which is, perhaps, due as much to the pen of the writer, as to the
inherent diversities of the human character.

To this shrewdness of observation, he added a racy humor which those who
knew him in his hours of relaxation and familiarity will not easily
forget. His mind was stored with quaint and pithy phrases, and apt
illustrations, which he not unfrequently seasoned with his native idiom,
the broad Barnsley dialect. His north-country pronunciation, indeed, never
entirely forsook him; and the singular graft of German which he made upon
it during his residence abroad, caused it to be commonly supposed, by
those who were strangers to his history, that he was a native of Germany.

The same moral constitution that enabled John Yeardley to pursue his
objects with indomitable perseverance, sometimes betrayed him, as may
easily be imagined, into a tenacity of purpose, bordering upon obstinacy.
To the same strength of will also, acting on the defects incident to a
neglected education in early life, must be attributed those strong
prejudices which were at times to be remarked in him, and of which he
found it extremely difficult to divest himself. But it was the triumph of
grace, that whilst these faults of character and disposition remained for
the most part only as a hidden thorn, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, the virtues to which they were allied, and all the faculties of his
mind, were consecrated to the service of God and of his fellow-man, and
his whole nature was enlarged, refined and elevated, by the all-powerful
energy of the gospel.

"Very sweet and instructive are our recollections of the humility of his
walk amongst us, and of the liveliness of his ministry, marked as it was
by much simplicity, love and earnestness." To this testimony of his
Monthly Meeting, all who were accustomed to hear him will readily
subscribe.

We are able to append some notes of a few of his public testimonies, which
we give as likely to be at once gratifying and instructive to the reader.
The friend to whom we are indebted for them informs us that "the notes
were written immediately after meeting, and are as nearly the words used
as his memory would furnish." He adds, "They bring before the mind's eye
and ear the face and voice of a dear departed friend, and, I believe, a
true and enlightened servant of the Lord."

       *       *       *       *       *


(8 _mo_, 1850.)

_Keep thy heart, with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life_.--(Proverbs iv. 23.)

We often are made to feel the force of this truth, when we have been
unwatchful, and some cross occurrence has tried our tempers. How often we
are made to see, and to show before others, what manner of spirit is in
as.....

Sometimes we are favored with such clear convictions of the worthlessness
of mere worldly possessions and pursuits, and such delightful realizations
of the happiness of seeking to do the Lord's work, that we are ready to
express our astonishment that any human beings can be found so foolish as
to devote their energies to the pursuit of things which never can give
satisfaction, and which must needs perish. And then, perhaps, we are
brought into a state of darkness and despondency, to show us our utter
helplessness and unworthiness, and the need there is for every one of us
to "keep the heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life."....

Every individual, no doubt, has his own particular path of duty, which is
designed to promote his own best happiness and the well-being of all
mankind. How important for each to follow that path in watchfulness and
obedience, that the work may not be marred! How important to keep the
heart with all diligence, that the issues of life may be in accordance
with divine will!

       *       *       *       *       *


(9 _mo_. 1, 1850.)

_Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house of the
Lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty_.--(2 Chronicles
xxxi. 10.)

These words have been impressed upon my mind this morning, and I have
thought they were instructive, in a spiritual sense. I believe, if we were
more earnest in bringing offerings into the house of the Lord--if each one
of us was more diligent in contributing his share, and doing his part of
the Lord's business,--we should have less anxiety about worldly things; we
should have faith in the Lord's providence, and, not only spiritually, but
naturally also, we should have "enough to eat and plenty left."

       *       *       *       *       *


(11 _mo_. 24, 1850.)

In looking at the world around, we may be apt to think that the day is
very far off when the Lord's kingdom, shall be established in peace: but
to those who, through the regenerating power of Christ, have become
subjects of the Prince of Peace, that day has commenced already; and
whatever storms may rage without, they will experience peace within. For
"he will keep them in perfect peace whose minds are staid on him, because
they trust in him."

       *       *       *       *       *


(9 _mo_. 19, 1852.)

John Yeardley addressed the children with much feeling, telling them to
rely on the Lord Jesus Christ in all their ways--to let him carry them in
his bosom, and to run to him in danger or trouble, as they would to their
tender mothers.

       *       *       *       *       *


You sometimes are restless in these meetings, not knowing how to keep your
thoughts fixed on heavenly things, and perplexed for want of some visible
means of instruction. I believe your tender Saviour may often feed you,
even while in this state, with food convenient for you. But remember, dear
children, that he is always calling to every one of you, Come unto Me.
Suffer little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not. O! come to
him, my precious lambs, and he will feed you, and "lead you beside the
still waters, and make you lie down in green pastures."

       *       *       *       *       *


(12 _mo_. 8, 1854 At a Funeral.)

_And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs
and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing shall flee away._--(Isa. xxxv. 10.)

In the pain of parting with the beloved object of our heart's affection,
we forget the rejoicing which welcomes the ransomed spirit to its
everlasting rest. But when the time is come for the Lord to pour in the
healing balm into the sorrowing soul, then we find a little comfort. ....

"Watchman! what of the night? Watchman! what of the night? The watchman
said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will inquire, inquire
ye: return; come." There are many in this company in the morning of life,
enjoying the prospect of many days, and forming many plans for the future,
with all the ardor of their youthful minds. May the present occasion prove
the morning of their spiritual day; and may they remember that the
_night cometh as well as the morning_.

How thin is the partition which separates the present state from that of
eternity! We mourn over those who are taken away from us, and we fancy we
are left alone. But we are called to be _one in Christ_. I have great
faith in the communion of saints, in the union of saints on earth with
saints in heaven. And we are all called to be saints by walking in faith,
by leading a life of holiness in the fear of the Lord. We say our beloved
friends who have gone before us are dead. _They are not dead: they have
but just entered into life._ Let us not mourn, then, as those who have no
hope. Let us rather rejoice with them and for them, and so live that we
may be among the ransomed of the Lord, who shall return and come to Zion
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.

THE END.

[Footnote 1:
The memorandum here referred to is in the Diary, under date of the 18th of
the Sixth Month.]

[Footnote 2:
Life of B. Grubb, 2nd ed., p. 219.]

[Footnote 3:
The introduction was made by Thomas Shillitoe, at the time of the Yearly
Meeting. He said to M.S., "Let me introduce thy brother to thee."
"_Brother_!" she exclaimed, with surprise. "Yes," answered the good
old man; "all who have been on the Continent are brothers and sisters."]

[Footnote 4:
Pastor Fliedner has since become more extensively known by the institution
for Deaconesses which he has founded at Kaiserswerth, where, with many
other useful and exemplary women, Florence Nightingale was trained.
Kaiserwerth has become the parent of several other kindred institutions.]

[Footnote 5:
This is one of the earliest burial-grounds which belonged to Friends. Over
the gateway was a curious inscription on brass, now removed to Barnsley.
It is as follows:

"Anno Domini 1657. Though superstitious minds doe judge amisse of this
buriall plane, yet lett them know hereby that the Scripture saith, The
earth, it is the Lord's. And I say soe is this, therefore seeing we, and
by his people also sett apart for the churches use, or a buriall place, it
is holy, or convenient and good for that use and service, as every other
earth is. And it is not without Scripture warrant or example of the holy
men of God to burie in snoh a place; for Joshua, a servant of the Lord and
commander in chiefe or leader and ruler of the people of God when he died
was neither buried in a steeple-house now called a parish church, nor in a
steeple-house-yeard, but he was buried in the border of his inheritance,
and on the north side of Mount Gaash, as you may read; see Joshua, the
24th chapter, and the 29th and 30th verses. And Eleazer, Aaron's son, who
was called of the Lord, when he died, (they buried him not in a parish
house, nor a steeple-house yeard, but) they buried him in the hill of
Phinehas, his son, which was given him in Mount Ephraim, as you may read,
Joshua, the 24th, the 33rd v. And these were noe superstitious persons,
but beloved, of the Lord, and were well buried. And soe were they In
Abraham's bought field, Genesis, the 23rd chapter, the 17, 18, 19, and 20
verses: though superstitious minds now are unwilling unto the truth to
bow, who are offended at such as burie in their inheritance or bought
field, appointed for that use."]

[Footnote 6:
This young person, under the name of Amanda, is the subject of No. 7 of a
series of small tracts published by John Yeardley in the latter years of
his life.]

[Footnote 7:
She brought an affectionate epistle from M.A. Calame. The felicity of
style and beauty of penmanship which distinguished the letters of this
extraordinary woman agreed with the rest of her character. We have the
epistle in question now before us, exquisitely written. It ends with these
words;--

"Il nous eut ete bien doux de prononger les moments de la voir encore,
mais la sagesse demande que tout se fasse avec ordre; voila pourquoi notre
chere enfant vous est confiee plus tot; que le seigneur l'accompagne et
vous aussi, precieux amis; nous vous confions tous trois a la garde
divine, et nous vous assurons encore ici de l'affection Chretienne qui
unit nos ames aux votres en Celui qui est le lieu indissoluble.

M. A. Calame."

Locle, 24 du 9 mois, '33.]

[Footnote 8:
We believe Joseph John Gurney is here referred to.]

[Footnote 9:
See _The Widow's Mite_, No. 5 of J.Y.'s Series of Tracts.]

[Footnote 10:
The visits of J. and M.Y. to Kreuznach, in this journey, form the subject
of No. 8 of John Yeardley's Series of Tracts, _The German Farmer become
Preacher._ We extract from it the following more particular description
of their visit to the three villages mentioned in the text:--

"We started on a bright, hot sunny morning; and a pleasant drive, through
the vines and under the agreeable shade of double rows of fruit trees,
brought us to the place of destination. At the first farmhouse where we
alighted the people were busy at their out-door work, which, however, on
hearing of the arrival of strangers, they soon left, and came to welcome
the travellers with outstretched hand and smiling countenances. They soon
gave proof of their hospitality, by ordering us to be served with fruit,
milk, and butter-bread, nor were we allowed to depart before partaking of
a cup of coffee. The master of the house was an intelligent, pious man,
and gave us much information as to the state of religion among the people.
After wending our way from village to village and from house to house, we
returned to our lodgings, favorably impressed with the piety and apparent
sincerity of this simplehearted people."]

[Footnote 11:
The history of this worthy man is given in the Tract mentioned in the last
note, _The German Farmer_, &c.]

[Footnote 12:
See John Yeardley's Tract, No. 5, _The Widow's Mite cast into the
Heavenly Treasury._]

[Footnote 13:
or a fuller description of this visit, see J.Y.'s Tract, _The German
Farmer_, &c.]

[Footnote 14:
After his return, a letter was received from one of the missionaries at
Constantinople, expressive of the pleasure which his visit had given
there, the regret of the writer that age and fatigue prevented him from
pursuing his journey to the more remote stations, and the cordial welcome
which "such Christian friends of any denomination" might always reckon
upon from the missionary brethren.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Memoir and Diary of John Yeardley,
Minister of the Gospel, by John Yeardley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOHN YEARDLEY ***

***** This file should be named 10369.txt or 10369.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/3/6/10369/

Produced by Joshua Hutchinson, Sheila Vogtmann and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


