The Project Gutenberg eBook, Twixt France and Spain, by E. Ernest Bilbrough


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Twixt France and Spain

Author: E. Ernest Bilbrough

Release Date: December 8, 2003  [eBook #10403]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWIXT FRANCE AND SPAIN***


E-text prepared by Carlo Traverso, Lois Gaudard, and Project Gutenberg
Distributed Proofreaders. This file was produced from images generously
made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at
http://gallica.bnf.fr.



'TWIXT FRANCE AND SPAIN;

Or, A Spring in the Pyrenees

BY

E. ERNEST BILBROUGH.







[Illustration: MAP OF THE PYRENEES
(To accompany "TWIXT FRANCE & SPAIN")
With the Principal Peaks, Rivers & Roads.]




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

PAU.

Trains and steamers--Bordeaux and its hotels--Lamothe
--Morcenx--Dax--Puyoo--Orthez--First impressions of Pau--The hotels and
pensions--Amusements--Pension Colbert--Making up parties for the
Pyrenees--The Place Royale and the view--The castle of Pau and its
approaches--Origin of name--Historical notes--The towers--Visiting
hours--The tapestries--The wonderful bedstead--The delusive
tortoiseshell cradle--The "Tour de la Monnaie"--The park--The Billeres
plains--Tennis and golf--The Route de Billeres and the Billeres
woods--French _sportsmen_--Hunting--Racing--Lescar and its old
cathedral--Fontaine de Marnieres--The bands--The Parc Beaumont
--Ballooning--The Casino--Polo--The cemetery--The churches of
St. Martin and St. Jacques--The "old world and the new"--Rides and
drives--to Betharram--The start--Peasants and their ways--Vines
trained by the roadside--Sour grapes--The "March of the Men of Garlic"
--Coarraze--Henry IV.'s Castle--Betharram--The ivied bridge--The
inn--The "Via Crucis"--Assat and Gelos--The Coteaux--Perpignaa
--Sketching with a donkey-cart--Over the Coteaux to Gan--The
drive to Pietat--Picnicking and rejected attentions--The
church--Feather moss--Bizanos--Carnival time--"Poor Pillicoddy"
--"Idyllic Colbert."


CHAPTER II.

BAGNERES DE BIGORRE.

Backward spring--Hotel Beau Sejour--Effect of the war of '70 on the
English colony--The "Coustous"--The Church of St. Vincent--Geruzet's
marble works--Donkeys--Up the Monne--Bains de Sante--Bains de Grand
Pre--Salut Avenue and baths--"Ai-ue, Ai-ue"--Luncheon--Daffodils--The
summit and the view--The "Castel-Mouly"--The Tapere--Mde. Cottin--Mont
Bedat--Gentians--The Croix de Manse--"The Lady's Farewell to her
Asinine Steed"--Market-day--The old iron and shoe dealers--Sunday--A
cat fight--The English Church--To the Col d'Aspin--"The Abbe's
Song"--Baudean--Campan, its people and church--Wayside chapels--Ste.
Marie--The route to Gripp, &c.--Payole--The pine forest--The Col
d'Aspin--The view from the Monne Rouge--"The Plaint of the Weather-beaten
Pine"--The Menu at Payole--Hurrah for the milk!--Departures--Divine
music--Aste--Gabrielle d'Estrelle--The ivied ruins--The church--
Pitton de Tournefort--Gerde--The pigeon traps--The cattle market
--The Jacobin tower--Theatre--Grand Etablissement des Thermes
--Hospice Civil--Eglise des Carmes--Mount Olivet--Madame Cheval,
her cakes and tea--Bigorre in tears


CHAPTER III.

LOURDES.

The journey to Tarbes--The Buffet and the Nigger--Lourdes station in
the wet--Importunate "Cochers"--Hotel des Pyrenees--"Red tape" and
Porters--Lourdes in sunshine--Sightseeing--The "Rue de la Grotte"--
"The Cry of the Lourdes Shopkeepers"--Candle-sellers--The
Grotto--Abject reverence--The Church--Saint Bernard--Interior of
church--The panorama--Admirable effect--Rue du Fort--The castle--The
view from the Tower--Pie de Mars, or Ringed Ousels


CHAPTER IV.

ARGELES.

Road _v_. rail--Scenes, sublime and ridiculous--Hotel
d'Angleterre--Questions and "The Argeles Shepherd's Reply"--A forbidden
path--The ride to Ges, Serres, Salluz, and Ourous--Argeles
church--Route Thermale--Ges--The tree in the path--"A regular
fix"--Serres--"It's a stupid foal that doesn't know its own mother"
--A frothing stream--A fine view--Pigs in clover--Salluz
--Ourous--Contented villagers--The high road--The bridge on the
Pierrefitte road--Advice to sketchers--"Spring's Bitters and
Sweets"--The "witch of the hills"--Large green lizards--"Jeannette's
Lamb"--Round the Argeles valley--Chateau de Beaucens--Villelongue--
Soulom--The old church--Hotel de la Poste, Pierrefitte--St. Savin--The
verger and the ancient church--Cagots--"The Organ's Tale"--St. Savin's
tomb--The Chateau de Miramont--Jugged Izard--Market-day--Sour bread and
the remedy--Arrival of the first parcel.


CHAPTER V.

CAUTERETS.

Hotel de la Poste, Pierrefitte--The Gorge--Its majestic beauty--The
resemblance to the Llanberis Pass--Mrs. Blunt becomes poetical--Zinc
mines--Le Pont de Mediabat--Entering the town--The Rue Richelieu and
Hotel du Parc--Winter's seal upon them still--Thermes des
Oeufs--Thermes de Cesar--The Casino and Esplanade des Oeufs--A good
dinner and the menu--The start for the Col de Riou--The Grange de la
Reine Hortense--The pines--Miss Blunt's "Exhortation to the First
Snow"--The dogs and their gambols--Defeated, but not discouraged--To
the Cerizey Cascade--The baths of La Raillere, Petit St. Sauveur, and
Le Pre--Cascade de Lutour--The Marcadau Gorge--Scenery--Pic de
Gaube--At the Cerizey Cascade--The Pont d'Espagne and Lac de
Gaube--Pont de Benques--Lutour valley--Various excursions up same--The
"Parc"--Allees de Cambasque--The Peguere--The "Pagoda" villa--
Promenade du Mamelon Vert--The road's up again--Blows and blasts--The
bishop's arrival--Enthusiasm, pomposity, and benedictions--The pilgrims
at large--They start on an excursion--The market and Hotel de
Ville--The grocer's opinion--Pyrenean dogs and their treatment--The
dog-fancier--Smiles and temper--Bargaining displaced--No dog after all!


CHAPTER VI.

LUZ AND BAREGES.

Rain at starting--A blighted view, yet lovely still--Pont
d'Enfer--Nature's voice--Sere and Esquiez--Luz--Its situation and
status--An old house--The ancient church of the Templars--La Chapelle
de St. Roch--Pyrenean museum--Hotel de l'Univers--Chateau de Ste.
Marie--"The Jackdaw's Causerie"--A new "diet of worms"--The new
bathing establishment--To Bareges--Pic d'Ayre--Esterre--Viella
--Betpouey--Mill conduits--Cercle des Etrangers--Opinion of the
town--Grand Etablissement--Promenade Horizontale--Hospice de Ste.
Eugenie--"The Jay of Bareges"--Wood anemones--Hepaticas--Valley
of Lienz--Pic de Lienz--Pic d'Ayre's summit--Pic de Neouville--Mountain
rhododendrons--_Anemone vernalis_


CHAPTER VII.

ST. SAUVEUR.

Pont de Pescadere--Sassis--Gave de Gavarnie--St. Sauveur--Hotel de
France--Pont Napoleon--Napoleon's pillar--Bee orchids--Chapel of
Solferino--The view from thence--Ne'er a hermit but for gold--Luz
cemetery--Luz post-office--Short cuts--Pharmacie Claverie--Jardin a
l'Anglaise--Ascent of Pic de Bergons--Villenave--The shepherds'
huts--Lunch--Snow, its use and abuse--On foot--"Excelsior"--Dangerous
footing--The last crest but one--The view--Gavarnie and Argeles in
sight--A lazy guide--A "fast" bit--Mountain flowers--Mr. Sydney to the
fore--A short walk and a good view--To Sazos and Grust--The bathing
establishments--Sazos: the old church--The belfry--Chiming
extraordinary--Various promenades--Gems of hill and vale


CHAPTER VIII.

GAVARNIE.

A "falling glass"--The wonderful echo--Cascade Lassariou--Sia and its
bridge--Pont de Desdouroucat--"Changing scenes"--Bugaret torrent--The
Pimene--Bue--Gedre--Breche de Roland in the distance--The
"Grotto"--Scenery at fivepence per head--Daffodils--Lofty
summits--Cascade d'Arroudet--Chaos--Valley of the "Ten Thousand Rocks,"
Amoy--A dirty avalanche--The Sugar-loaf--Travellers' troubles
--Importunate females--Hotel des Voyageurs--Poc--Guide or no
guide--Chute de Lapaca--The guardian summits of the Cirque--Cascade du
Marbore--Chandelles du Marbore--The Cirque--Its marvellous
beauty--Reluctantly returning--"The Guide's Auction"--"Two women
enough for a market, and three for a fair"--A Yankee tale--Sketching
and flowers--Tempers and appetites


CHAPTER IX.

FROM LUZ AND ST. SAUVEUR TO BAGNERES DE LUCHON.

A smiling valley--Lourdes again--The chapel in the crypt--St. Peter's
statue--Burnished toes--Solemn quietude--Preparing for the great
pilgrimage--"Ornamented" crosses--Mr. Sydney's new vocation, "Guide,
Philosopher, and Friend"--Bigorre again--An open-air concert
--Harmonious echoes--Paying through the nose--The fete at
Payole--Sport a la francaise--Costumes--The view from the Col
d'Aspin--Arreau--Quaint houses--La Chapelle de St. Exupere--A whining
"gardien"--Eglise de Notre Dame--The river Neste--Hotel de
France--Borderes--Avajan--Louderville--Oxslips and cowslips--Wild
narcissus--Col de Peyresourde--The view--Garin--Cazaux--St.
Aventin--Lovely avenues--Our destination


CHAPTER X.

BAGNERES DE LUCHON.

The bathing establishment and its surroundings--The lovely
_Allees_--Montauban church and cascade--The Villa Russe and its
genial host--Various excursions--Orphanage of Notre Dame de
Rocher--The Vallee du Lys--The Rue d'Enfer and cascades--A lively
scene--The view from Superbagneres--Loading wood--"The Oxen's
Appeal"--Visit to the Orphanage--A "holy" relic--To Bosost--St.
Mamet--"A stumbling-block"--Cascade of Sidonie--Horse tricks and
jockey dodges--Lizards in flight--Fashion on a donkey--On the Portillon
'twixt France and Spain--The valley of Aran--Snug Bosost--A curious
inn--Children with artistic bent--A bright pathway--Missing much, but
thankful still


CHAPTER XI.

ST. BERTRAND DE COMMINGES.

Keeping to old friends--Valley history--Entering the Garonne
valley--The picturesque St. Beat--St. Beat to Viella--Memories of the
lovely Thames--Baths of Ste. Marie--Loures--The cross-roads--Weak
walls--Entering St. Bertrand--An ancient house--The inn--A charming
garden--The cathedral--A national disgrace--"The Crocodile of St.
Bertrand"--The tomb of Hugues de Chatillon--Travelling desecraters--St.
Bertrand's rod--The ruined cloisters--Desolation--Swine
feeding--Montrejeau--The buffet--No milk!--French railway
officials--Trying experiences


CHAPTER XII.

EAUX BONNES AND EAUX CHAUDES.

Carriage _v_. diligence--Early birds--Height of absurdity
--Diminutive donkeys--A whitened region--"Crystal clear"--Washerwomen
and their gamps--A useful townhall--A half-way house--Moralising--A
much-loved pipe--An historic ruin--A noteworthy strong box--"Ici on
rase"--Where are the bears?--Women in gaiters--Picturesque costumes--A
lovely road--A "perfect" cure--A spring scene--A billiard-playing
priest--A well-placed pavilion--The Valentin and its cascades--
Through solid rock--Gaps in the road--A grand scene--Wanted, an
artist--A fine torrent--Professional fishers--Lucky guests
--Musings--Poor Mr. Tubbins--Bonnes _v_. Chaudes--Over the
Col de Gourzy--Peculiar teams--Guelder roses--Spinning


CHAPTER XIII.

BIARRITZ.

A warm ride--Bayonne--A "Noah's ark" landscape--
Amusements--Bathing--Shells--Cavillers--A canine feat--The pier and
rocks--A restless sea--"The Three Cormorants"--Dragon's-mouth Rock--To
the lighthouse--Maiden-hair ferns--Mrs. Blunt's adventure--The drive
round the lakes--_Osmunda regalis_ ferns--The pine-woods near the
bar--St. Etienne and the Guards' cemetery--Croix de Mouguere--Cambo and
the Pas de Roland--Anemones--A fat couple--A French scholar--Hendaye--
Fuenterabia--A quaint old-world town--The Bidassoa--Pasages--San
Sebastien--The Citadol and graves--The "Silent Sisters"--Raised
prices--Parasols and spectacles


CHAPTER XIV.

CONCLUSION.

"Where duty leads"--Resorts in the Eastern Pyrenees--Caen--"Riou"--Our
paths diverge--"The Lesson of the Mountains"--Farewell

       *       *       *       *       *

APPENDIX A

APPENDIX B

APPENDIX C

APPENDIX D

INDEX



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.



MAP OF THE PYRENEES

DAX

THE TOWER OF MONCADE, ORTHEZ

PAU (FROM THE JURANCON SIDE OF THE GAVE)

THE CASTLE COURTYARD

IN THE CASTLE PARK

THE PINE FOREST NEAR THE COL D'ASPIN

THE "PALOMIERES DE GERDE"

LOURDES (A SMALL GENERAL VIEW)

THE "OLD FORT" AT LOURDES

ON THE ROAD TO ARGELES

A "REGULAR Fix" (by Miss BLUNT)

A PRETTY BIT AT ARGELES

CAUTERETS

THE ASCENT OF THE COL DE Riou (by Miss BLUNT)

THE LAC DE GAUBE

THE GORGE NEAR PIERREFITTE

THE ANCIENT CHURCH OF THE TEMPLARS AT LUZ

THE CASTLE OF STE. MARIE

BAREGES

ST. SAUVEUR

PONT NAPOLEON, ST. SAUVEUR (by Miss BLUNT)

THE VILLAGE OF GEDRE

THE CHAOS NEAR GAVARNIE

THE CIRQUE OF GAVARNIE (IN SUMMER)

"ON THE TAREES ROAD"

THE PEARL IN THE PEERLESS VALLEY

THE CHURCH OF MONTAUBAN (by Miss BLUNT)

THE RUE D'ENFER AND THE CASCADES

ON THE ROAD TO SUPERBAGNERES

ST. BERTRAND DE COMMINGES

THE CROCODILE OF ST. BERTRAND (by Miss BLUNT)

IN THE OLD CHURCH AT LARUNS

CASCADE DU VALENTIN

CRABE BRIDGE, IN THE EAUX CHAUDES GORGE

THE BIOUS-ARTIGUES

THE PIC DE GER

THE ROCKS OF BIARRITZ

THE VILLA EUGENIE

MRS. BLUNT'S ADVENTURE (by Miss BLUNT):--

  SCENE I.--BEFORE THE START
  SCENE II.--THE ANCIENT STEED GREW YOUNG ONCE MORE
  SCENE III.--WHO'S MY DRIVER?

"MY PAW IS ON MY NATIVE HEATH, AND MY NAME IS 'Riou'" (by Miss BLUNT)

"SEE MORNING'S GOLDEN RAYS," &c.

"TOWERING ABOVE THE PLAIN"

PANORAMA OF THE CIRQUE OF THE VALLEE DU LYS

PANORAMA OF THE PIC DU MIDI DE BIGORRE




PREFACE.


It has been my endeavour in this volume to provide an illustrated
gossiping Guide to the Spas of the Pyrenees. Unlike previous books
on the same region, it deals with the resorts in spring, when they
are most charming. A certain amount of detail--which is unavoidable
in all guide-books--has been unavoidable here, and the rhymes have
been introduced in the hope of lightening the reading. These
rhymes, as a rule, have a distinct bearing on the subject under
discussion; but they are inserted in such a manner that the reader
can omit to read them--if he objects to such frivolities--without
losing the sense of the prose.

Very little really fresh information has been gained about these
beautiful mountains since Mr. Charles Packe published his 'Guide to
the Pyrenees' in 1867: a few more springs have been discovered, a
few more mountains have been successfully ascended, and the towns
have gradually increased in size. There have been very few of those
melancholy accidents that we so often hear of from Switzerland,
because, probably, considerably fewer tourists attempt these
mountains than attempt the Alps. In this volume no descriptions of
scaling ice-walls, searching for the lammergeiers' nests, or any
other great feats, will be found. It contains a plain account of
what may be seen and done by any party visiting the mountain
resorts in spring, without much trouble or fatigue; and the
narrative form has been adopted throughout.

M. Dore's illustrations speak for themselves; and Miss Blunt's
spirited sketches are a valuable acquisition.

The Appendices have been compiled with great care; and--at the
suggestion of an experienced M.D.--brief comments on the chief
springs at the various Spas, and their healing properties, have
been included in the general information.

I beg to acknowledge my indebtedness to M. Joanne's 'Pyrenees' and
Mr. Black's 'Summer Resorts;' and I have also great pleasure in
thanking Miss Blunt for her sketches, and my friend Mr. A. H. Crow,
F.R.G.S., for his kindly assistance in correcting inaccuracies. As,
however, it is extremely difficult to completely avoid them, I
shall feel obliged for the notification of any others that may
happen to exist.

E. E. B.



INTRODUCTION.

Considering the number of English and Americans who yearly visit
Switzerland and the Riviera, it is astonishing that so few,
comparatively, ever think of approaching nearer to the Pyrenees
than Pau. And it is more astonishing still, that those who have
been enabled to enjoy the beauty of these mountains from the Place
Royale at Pau, should ever think of leaving their vicinity without
a more intimate acquaintance with them.

It may be, that since the various resorts have gained celebrity for
the healing powers of their waters, healthy travellers are of
opinion that they will be surrounded by a crowd of sickly
individuals, whose very appearance will spoil all the pleasure that
they might otherwise experience. That this _might be_ the case _in
the season_, at a few spas, is not to be denied, but _in spring_
not an invalid of that kind is to be met with, and the bathing
establishments have no customers; but the scenery is everywhere at
its best. Dr. Madden writes: "The attractions of the Pyrenees are
not, however, confined to the invalid traveller, but even for the
pleasure tourist offer inducements for a pedestrian excursion in
some respects superior to any in Switzerland;" and there can be no
doubt that they have a beauty of their own quite distinct from the
grandeur of the Alps, and yet equally as wonderful in its style.

Extending for nearly 300 miles from the foaming billows of the
Biscay to the azure waters of the Mediterranean, they form a huge
barrier "'twixt France and Spain"; gaining their name of Pyrenees
from the words "Pic Neres," which in the _patois_ of the country
signifies "black peaks!" That this title is a misnomer for all but
three months of the year--viz., from July to October--must be
already a well-known fact; for who would call them "black" when
clothed in their garments of snow?

The highest summits are in the Maladetta group, and the Pic Nethou
(11,170 ft.) is the highest of all; while the average height of
this magnificent range of mountains is between five and six
thousand feet.

Luxurious valleys branch out in all directions, fed by the mountain
streams, and among the central heights the wonderful natural
amphitheatres known as Cirques stand in majestic solitude. The
Cirque of Gavarnie--the best known--possesses on a bright day in
spring such a charm, in its snowy imperial splendour, as the Alps
would fail to surpass. In scenes where a lake adds such wonderful
effect, Switzerland is quite supreme; we know of no view in the
Pyrenees, of a comparable nature, that could pretend to vie with
the harmonious loveliness of the panorama that can be seen at
sunset from Montreux across Lac Leman, when the water is rippleless
and the mountains are bathed in a rosy flood. But for all that, in
other ways--in flower-clothed slopes, in luxurious valleys, in
winding rivers and foaming cascades--the Pyrenees present pictures
that, with the freshness of springtime to aid them, cannot fail to
delight and charm.

Four roads cross the Pyrenees from France to Spain: the Route
Nationale, from Paris to Madrid _via_ Bayonne; the Route
Departementale, from Bayonne to Pampeluna _via_ the Col d'Urdax; the
Route Nationale, from Perpignan to Barcelona _via_ Gerona; and the
route from Pau to Jaca _via_ Oloron. There are other ways of entering
Spain by the Cols (passes), but over these a horse track is the
broadest path.

The principal bathing resorts on the French side are connected by
the splendid Route Thermale, which extends for 70 miles; but, owing
to its exposed position in some parts, especially between Eaux
Bonnes and Argeles, and Bareges and Ste. Marie, it is only wholly
open three or four months in the year!

Of the mineral springs it is sufficient to state here that, within
the same extent of country, no other part of Europe can present
such a wonderful choice. There are three principal kinds--the
sulphurous, the saline, and the ferruginous; and over 200 springs
contribute to them. Some resorts have waters of each of these
classes, and many have at any rate two out of the three.

Of these, fuller information is given in the Appendix, as well as
the chief uses of each, and the affections for which they have been
successfully used.

As regards sport, unattended by much labour or fatigue, the
Pyrenees can hardly be recommended, except perhaps for fishing.
There is very good fishing in several of the rivers, but unhappily
French conservancy laws are so lax--if indeed they have any at all
--that peasants may frequently be seen at the waterside with a rod
in one hand and a capacious net in the other, so that if
unsuccessful with the first, they will at any rate not come home
empty-handed; unless some brother "sportsman" has just preceded
them over the same pools!

Though the wolves have nearly all been poisoned, there are still
some bears to shoot in winter, and izard (a species of chamois) and
capercailzie to pursue in autumn; but the "sportsmen" are many and
the game few, and the way to their haunts lies by bad and
unfrequented paths; so that "le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle." To
the botanist and the geologist, however, there is a splendid field,
which, varying in richness according to the locality, is more or
less rich everywhere; and besides these, the entomologist will not
visit this territory in vain. To the mountaineer these almost
numberless summits offer attractions of all kinds, from the wooded
slope with its broad mule-path, to the ice-wall only to be scaled
by the use of the rope and the hatchet. There are ascents which a
child almost might attempt in safety, and there are others where
the bravest men might well quail.

For the ordinary pedestrian, beautiful walks abound in the vicinity
of nearly every Spa, but near St. Sauveur, Luchon, Eaux Chaudes,
and Argeles they are, we think, most charming. The roads on the
whole are excellent, and the hotels, with hardly any exceptions,
particularly clean and comfortable; and, with the one drawback of
the bread (see Appendix D)--which can be easily remedied--the food
is well cooked and well served.

It must be understood that the succeeding chapters only describe--
or attempt to describe--scenes that every one in moderate health
can go and enjoy for themselves, and it is in the hope that a few
more may be induced to visit the region about which they speak,
that they have ever seen the light. For accurate information about
the mountains and the best means of ascending them, no better
guide-books could be wanted than Count Russell's 'Grandes
Ascensions des Pyrenees' [Footnote: Hachette et Cie., Paris.] in
French and English, and Mr. Chas. Packe's 'Guide to the Pyrenees';
[Footnote: Longmans and Co., London.] while for information of all
kinds Monsieur P. Joanne's 'Pyrenees,' [Footnote: Hachette et Cie.,
Paris.] in French, could hardly be surpassed. For the ordinary
traveller Mr. Black's 'South of France Summer Resorts, Pyrenees,'
&c., is a compact and useful companion; and for guidance in matters
medical, Dr. Madden's 'Spas of the Pyrenees' and Dr. Lee's 'Baths
of France' are exceedingly valuable.

With these preliminary remarks we beg to refer the reader to our
experiences of 'A Spring in the Pyrenees.'






CHAPTER I.

PAU.

Trains and Steamers--Bordeaux and its Hotels--Lamothe--Morcenx--
Dax--Puyoo--Orthez--First impressions of Pau--The Hotels and
Pensions--Amusements--Pension Colbert--Making up parties for the
Pyrenees--The Place Royale and the view--The Castle of Pau and its
approaches--Origin of name--Historical notes--The Towers--Visiting
hours--The Tapestries--The Wonderful Bedstead--The Delusive
Tortoiseshell Cradle--The "Tour de la Monnaie"--The Park--The
Billeres Plains--Tennis and Golf--The Route de Billeres and the
Billeres Woods--French _Sportsmen_--Hunting--Racing--Lescar and its
old Cathedral--Fontaine de Marnieres--The Bands--The Pare Beaumont
--Ballooning--The Casino--Polo--The Cemetery--The Churches of St.
Martin and St. Jacques--The "Old World and the New"--Rides and
Drives--to Betharram--The Start--Peasants and their ways--Vines
trained by the roadside--Sour Grapes--The "March of the Men of
Garlic"--Coarraze--Henry IV.'s Castle--Betharram--The Ivied Bridge
--The Inn--The "Via Crucis"--Assat and Gelos--The Coteaux--
Perpignaa--Sketching with a Donkey-cart--Over the Coteaux to Gan--
The Drive to Pietat--Picnicking and Rejected Attentions--The
Church--Feather Moss--Bizanos--Carnival time--"Poor Pillicoddy"--
"Idyllic Colbert."


Few Winter Resorts have gained a greater celebrity than Pau, and
its popularity yearly increases. Fifty years ago its English
visitors might have been counted by tens; to-day they must be
reckoned by thousands. But this is only during the winter and
spring; in summer it is almost entirely deserted by foreigners, few
people in fact, unless compelled by circumstances, staying after
May has passed into June.

For many reasons it has become a favourite resort for invalids, an
important one being, its exceedingly accessible position.
Notwithstanding that it is 776 miles distant from London, fewer
changes are requisite than for many a journey of less than a
quarter of the distance. The quickest way from London is _via_
Dover, Calais, Paris, Bordeaux and Dax; and as a through sleeping
carriage can be obtained from Paris to Pau, that part of the
journey is anything but formidable. For those who prefer the sea
route, the fine boats of the Pacific Steam Navigation Company which
start from Liverpool are the most preferable conveyance, though the
less expensive steamers belonging to the General Steam Navigation
Company, sailing from London, are comfortable enough in fine
weather. The former land their passengers at Pauillac, whence they
proceed to Bordeaux by tender or train; but the latter boats, being
smaller, can come right up to Bordeaux, which is a decided
advantage.

Though the third port in France, Bordeaux can certainly not be
recommended as a stopping-place unless necessity requires it, for
the hotel-keepers generally succeed in reaping a rich harvest from
travellers passing through.

The Hotel de Nantes is the nearest to the quay, but the Hotel
Richelieu will be found more moderate and more comfortable. In the
town, the grand Hotel de France has the best reputation, but "birds
of passage" have apparently to pay for it, whereas old stagers
concur in saying that for _gentlemen_--especially those who
appreciate a good dinner--the best place is the Hotel de Bayonne.

Bordeaux has many fine buildings and objects of interest over which
a week can be easily spent, and for this length of time the hotel
prices are in proportion considerably less per diem; but in winter
it is especially bleak and cold, and travellers are advised to get
on to Dax or Pau as quickly as possible. The railway journey of one
hundred and forty-five miles to Pau occupies as a rule about six
hours, passing Lamothe, Morcenx, Dax, Puyoo, and Orthez. Lamothe
[Footnote: See Appendix.] (25 miles) is the junction for Arcachon,
[Footnote: See Appendix.] the celebrated winter station among the
pines, situated on the shores of a landlocked bay; and Morcenx
[Footnote: See Appendix.] (68 miles), is likewise the junction for
the Tarbes line and Bigorre.

Dax [Footnote: See Appendix.] (92 miles) has a well-deserved
reputation for its baths, and possesses several mineral bathing
establishments, of which the "Grand Etablissement des Thermes"
stands first. The mud baths are perhaps more celebrated than those
of steam or water, being especially efficacious in severe, and
often apparently otherwise incurable, cases of rheumatism. There
are also some pleasant walks by the River Adour, and in the
neighbourhood there is a bed of fossil salt.

Puyoo [Footnote: See Appendix.] (111-1/2 miles) is the junction for
the Bayonne line, but is without other interest.

[Illustration: DAX.]

Orthez [Footnote: See Appendix.] (120-3/4 miles) is of historic
interest and possesses some noteworthy remains. M. Dore has
represented the Tour de Moncade, built in 1240, with mediaeval
surroundings, and not quite as it may be seen now. It was the scene
of many of Gaston Phoebus' greatest crimes. The old fourteenth-
century bridge over the river, with its central tower, could tell
some tales too, if we could discover "sermons in stones"; and the
plain below the town was the scene of one of Wellington's many
victories in 1814.

Two coaches start from Orthez, one to Salies (10 miles), celebrated
for its salt springs, and the other to Mauleon-Licharre, a
picturesque spot where fine views, cascades, and ruins abound.

[Illustration: THE TOWER OF MONCADE, ORTHEZ.]

Passing the ancient town of Lescar (140-1/2 miles)--of which we
shall have more to say later--the train is soon drawn up in the
station of Pau, and directly the traveller shows his face outside,
he is hailed by the "cochers" from the various hotels in a
bewildering chorus. This is the same, _more_ or _less_, at every
French town where English people congregate, and Pau only inclines,
if anything, towards the "_more_."

The first impression conveyed when leaving the station and passing
along the Avenue de la Gare, is, that the town is mainly composed
of the castle and magnificent hotels which tower above the station.
This, to a certain extent, is correct, for they occupy a large
area, and the views from the windows of the hotels, as well as from
those of the castle, are the finest in the town. Issuing from the
Avenue into the "Place de la Monnaie," the ruins of the "Mint"
tower, and above them the castle itself, come into full view, after
which the road continues along the Rue Marca for a short distance,
branching afterwards to the right into the most ancient square of
the town, the Place Grammont.

The hotels de la Poste and Henri IV. are here situated, but the
roads to the various other hotels and pensions diverge in different
directions. To the right up the Rue Bordenave and along the Rue
Henri IV. is the route to all the finest hotels, of which the
"France" is the best, and the "Gassion" the most imposing; the
others are the Belle Vue, Splendide, Beau Sejour, and de la Paix,
all with the exception of the last possessing the magnificent
mountain view, but although from the windows of the "Paix" only a
side glimpse can be obtained, yet at the same time this hotel faces
the "Place Royale," the popular resort of all classes in Pau. From
the left-hand corner of the Place Grammont a narrow street leads to
the fine church of St. Jacques, which is also the nearest way to
the grand Hotel Continental near Trinity Church, and the Pension
Hattersly in the Rue Porte Neuve. But the route more to the left
still, leading up the hill and joining the Route de Bordeaux, past
the Haute Plante parade ground, is the usual one followed,
especially for the Pensions--Lecour, Nogues, and Maison Piete in
the Rue d'Orleans; Pension Etcherbest, in the Passage Plante Hotel
de Londres, on the route de Billeres; and Maison Colbert, in the
Rue Montpensier.

Well knowing the comfort of a good pension, and intending to make a
long stay, we drove straight from the station to the well-known
Maison Colbert, and were soon as comfortable as we could wish.
There are many people we are aware who detest "pensions." "We don't
approve," say they, "of meals at fixed hours, of a drawing-room
common to all, and of such a small house that everybody must know
everyone else before the first dinner is over!" Well! why should
they? They can go to the hotels; but let all those who are
suffering or delicate put away thin-skinned feelings of
superiority, till they have a good enough constitution to support
them, and in the meantime seek peace and kindness, such as may be
experienced at the Pension Colbert.

If, on the other hand, it can be taken as a criterion that those
living in hotels are not invalids, then the visitor contingent of
Pau must consist principally of healthy people, who prefer a good
climate and lively society to the attractions that England and
America have to offer from October to May. This is hardly correct,
but there can be no doubt that more than half the foreigners
[Footnote: From the French standpoint--i.e., English and American.]
who come for that period, do so for comfort and pleasure alone. And
it is not to be wondered at. Who, that was untrammelled by the
cares of business, or shortened purse-strings, but would not gladly
exchange the bill of fare England has to offer, of London fogs,
east winds, Scotch mists, and Irish dynamite, for the handsome menu
awaiting him at Pau? Drives, kettledrums, dinners, balls, lawn
tennis, polo, pigeon-shooting, golf, racing and hunting; and, if he
particularly wishes it, a balloon ascent as well. This last-named
is an expensive pleasure, as the aeronaut, judging by the prices on
the bill, requires a substantial fee, and it is besides an
amusement life insurance companies do not readily countenance.

Of course, if one comes to Pau merely for enjoyment, hotel life may
be preferable to that in a pension, though our experiences of the
latter mode have been very pleasant ones. It is so easy to make up
a small party for a drive or a picnic, and being all in one house
there is but little chance of any mishaps before starting, such as
individuals forgetting the time that had been fixed and keeping the
rest waiting. Above all, when planning a tour into the Pyrenees, it
is essentially necessary to form a party of some sort, if the trip
is to be carried out in the spring; for although, as we shall
endeavour to show later, the scenery is then at its best, still,
since it is not _the_ season, only one or two hotels are open in
each resort, and society is "nil."

Then further, when people are going to travel in company for
several weeks it is well that at least they should know something
of one another, for if they all commenced "pulling different ways"
up in the mountains, the safety, or at any rate the composure of
each, would be likely to suffer. My own relations, who were with me
at first, left for England long before the mountain trip was
arranged, but we made up a very pleasant quartette before the time
for starting arrived, and accordingly visited Pau in company as
well as the mountains. This quartette consisted of Mrs. and Miss
Blunt, Mr. Sydney and myself, and though it will be seen by
subsequent chapters that the trio decided on staying a fortnight at
Biarritz in preference to following my example and spending the
time at Bagneres de Bigorre, yet we made arrangements to meet
either at Lourdes or Argeles and thenceforward to travel in
company.

To see Pau in its beauty, winter must have given place to spring.
When the grass once more begins to grow, the trees to unfold their
tender leaves, the rivers to swell, and the birds to sing; while
yet the sun's rays cannot pierce the snowy garment on the distant
heights; then Pau is in her beauty. Passing--as we so often passed
--down the Rue Montpensier and the consecutive Rue Serviez, into the
Rue du Lycee, then turning from it to the right for a short
distance, till, with the English club at the corner on our left, we
turned into the Place Royale, and, with the fine theatre frowning
on our backs, quickly made our way between the rows of plane-trees,
but just uncurling their leaves, to the terrace whence the whole
enormous expanse of mountain can be viewed, our admiration at the
magnificent scene unfolded before us never diminished. But our
favourite time was at sunset, especially one of those warm ruddy
sunsets that tint the heavens like a superb red canopy.

Then, leaning on the terrace wall, we admired in silence. Beneath
us lay part of the town and the railway station, the river beyond,
in one part divided and slowly flowing over its stony bed among the
alder bushes; at another, gathered together again, rushing
furiously along as though impatient to lose itself for ever in the
depths of the ocean.

[Illustration: PAU (FROM THE JURANCON SIDE OF THE GAVE).]

Beyond the river, amid the varied green of tree and meadow, nestled
the scattered villages, with the hills above, here brown with bare
vineyards, there vying with the meadow's green; and in the
background behind and above all, the mighty range of snow mountains
extending as far as eye could reach, and fading in the dim haze of
distance. Then, as the sun sank lower, the soft rosy hue shone on
the castle windows, glinted through the trees of the Chateau Park,
dyed the swift waters of the river, and tipped the snowy crests
afar. There are few, we think, who would not, as we did, enjoy
fully the contemplation of such a scene.

From the Place Royale to the Chateau is a very short distance;
turning to the right past the Church of St. Martin--a fine well-
built edifice--and the Hotel Gassion, it stands in full view, and
the broad walk passing beneath the side arches leads into the
courtyard. In order to obtain a good view of the entrance and the
towers that guard it, it is preferable to approach the castle by
the Rue Henri IV. (a continuation of the Rue du Lycee that passes
between the theatre and the end of the Place Royale), which, when
the shops are left behind, suddenly curves to the left, to the foot
of the bridge leading direct to the main entrance. It is worth
while to stand on the bridge for a short time, and survey the whole
scene, which can hardly fail to carry the thoughts back to olden
times, and as the castle is so intimately connected with the town
of Pau, a few explanatory historical facts will not, we trust, be
considered out of place before continuing the inspection of the
edifice. The origin of the name of Pau is the Spanish "Palo," a
"stick" or a "stake," and takes us back to the time when the
Saracens had taken possession of a large part of Spain and were
making raids beyond the Pyrenees. Feeling their unprotected
position, the inhabitants of the Gave Valley made over a piece of
ground to a Prince of Bearn, on the condition that he should erect
a fortress for their defence thereon. This he agreed to do, and as
the extent of his allotment was marked out by "stakes," the castle
became known as the castle of "stakes" or Palo, which in time
became Pau.

Its commanding position and appearance inspired confidence, and
houses soon sprang up around; and, at least a century before the
birth of Henry IV., Pau had become an important place. In time it
became the capital of the kingdom of Navarre, and later, when
Navarre, Bearn, and the "Pays Basques" were constituted as one
department in 1790, it still retained its position as chief town.

Now to resume our inspection from the bridge. The two towers in
full view on either side of the sculptured facade, are the finest
and most prominent of the six that flank the castle, but there is
one in the interior of the court of more interest. The highest of
these two is the donjon on the left, built of brick, and known as
"La Tour de Gaston Phoebus" (112 feet). Its walls are over eight
feet in thickness. The tower on the right is known as "La Tour
Neuve," while the most interesting is that known as "La Tour de
Montaueset" or "Monte-Oiseau," in which are the ancient dungeons and
oubliettes. The porter has rooms on the ground-floor of the Gaston
Phoebus Tower, and his wife sells photographs singly and in books.
Outside, underneath and adjoining the same tower, is a small modern
(1843) chapel.

The hours for visiting the interior of the Chateau are between 10
and 12 and 2 and 4 daily, and the entrance is free, though the
guide expects a gratuity, say of one franc for one person, two
francs for three. As we were always lucky enough to be the only
people wanting to inspect, at the particular hour we went--which
was always as near ten as possible--we managed by judicious means
to calm the impetuosity of the guide, and induce him to tell his
tale slowly. If, as usually happens, other people are there at the
same time, he rattles off his lesson at such a pace that it
requires very good French scholars to even _follow_ him; to
remember what he says is out of the question. Whether by "more
judicious means," it would be possible to induce him to go round
out of hours, we do not know, never having had occasion to try, but
we certainly think it would be worth an attempt, if the visitors
could not otherwise manage to hit a time when they could go over
alone.

Passing under one of the three arches of the facade, we traversed
the courtyard to the extremity, and while waiting for the guide to
come to us at the small side door, examined the curious sculptures
surrounding the window on the left. On the door being opened we
passed into the Salle des Gardes, and from that into the Salle a
Manger, where stands a statue of Henry IV., supposed to be more
like him than any other. Then through a succession of rooms and up
flights of stairs, and through rooms again, to describe which as
they deserve would alone fill up a small volume, but this we do not
intend to do, contenting ourselves with simply mentioning as much
of what we saw as we hope may induce everyone to follow our
example, and see them for themselves. To any lovers of a grand
view, that which may be seen from the upper windows of the castle
is almost alone worth coming for, and the tapestry which lines the
walls of many of the rooms is simply exquisite.

The "Sports and Pastimes of the various Months" of Flanders work,
in the "Salle des Etats"--the six pieces of Gobelin work in the
Queen's Boudoir on the first floor--the five pieces of the same
work, including "Venus's toilet," in Queen Jeanne's room on the
second floor, and the four pieces of Brussels in Henry IV.'s
bedroom--also on the second floor--are only a few of the many
wonderful pieces of tapestry.

[Illustration: THE CASTLE COURTYARD.]

In the "Grand Reception Room," in which the massacres took place in
1569, is a fine mosaic table and Sevres vases, besides the Flanders
tapestry.

There are several objects of interest in Henry IV.'s room, in which
he is said to have been born 13th December, 1553, including the
magnificently carved bedstead; but the chief attraction is the
tortoise-shell cradle, which as a rule Frenchmen come only to see.
Why they should come is quite a different matter, seeing that
although a tortoise's shell might make a very comfortable cradle
for even such an illustrious infant as was Henry IV., yet as he
never had anything to do with the one in question, it is rather
absurd that year after year they should flock to see it out of
respect to him; and the absurdity is greater, since in a statement
on the wall hard by this fact is made known. None of the northern
rooms are open to the public, but the chief objects of interest
have been transferred to the other wing!

Leaving the courtyard by the road under the side arches that leads
to the terrace, the tasteful gardening of the surroundings is
noticeable, and as soon as the lower walk is reached, the "Tour de
la Monnaie" lies in full view below. No efforts are made to keep
these ruins, in which Calvin used to preach, from crumbling into
dust. _"O tempora! O mores!"_

From the terrace on the other side of the Castle, the remains of
the old fosse may be seen, though houses are now built where the
water used to lie. A broad pathway encircles the edifice, and a
bridge leads from the extreme end over the Rue Marca into the
Castle Park, called also "lower plantation" (basse plante) in
distinction from the "upper plantation" (haute plante), which
surrounds the barracks. Near the road the trees are planted stiffly
in rows, but when another and smaller bridge has been traversed,
the beauty of the Park is manifest.

[Illustration: IN THE CASTLE PARK.]

Following the course of the river, and filled with the finest trees
and shrubs, through which the beautiful little nuthatch may
occasionally be seen flying, and among which many other birds sing--it
is indeed, with its long cool walks and pleasant glades, a lovely
promenade. The Bayonne road is the boundary on the opposite side from
the river, and just beyond the limits of the Park a path branches off
river-wards to the Billeres Plains, where tennis and golf are played.
In the opposite direction another leads up under the shadow of an old
church, and joins the Route de Billeres, which, starting from the Bordeaux
road, passes the Villa Lacroix and other handsome houses, and
descending throws off another branch into the Bayonne road. It then
curves in an opposite direction, and ascends, while at the same
time skirting the grounds of the Chateau de Billeres, to the
favourite Billeres woods. From the woods it communicates in a
nearly straight line with the Bordeaux road again, so that in
reality it describes three-quarters of a circle.

These woods, though sadly disfigured by the demand for fire-wood,
are pleasant to ramble in when the soldiers are not in possession,
and there are drives through them in all directions. At one time
wild duck, pigeons, and woodcock were plentiful there, but that
time has passed, though the gallant French _sportsmen_ may still be
seen trooping through with their dogs after blackbirds and tomtits!

Pau dearly loves excitement. Three times a week in the winter the
hounds meet in the vicinity, and many are the carriages and many
the fair occupants that congregate to see the start. It is
generally a very gay scene, with no lack of scarlet coats and good
steeds, pretty dresses and sometimes pretty faces too; and though
afterwards they enjoy many a good run, there are but few falls and
fewer broken heads. But it is over the races that Pau gets really
excited. Hunting only attracts the well-to-do, but all who can hire
or borrow even a shandry make a point of not missing the "races."
And these meetings are not few and far between, but about once a
fortnight, for there is no "Jockey Club" at Pau, and consequently
it pleases itself about the fixtures.

The course, which is some two miles from the town on the Bordeaux
road, is overlooked by an imposing grand stand, which generally
seems well filled, though the betting is not very heavy on the
whole. We drove over one afternoon, and after waiting for three
events which to us were not very exciting, proceeded towards
Lescar. The nearest way would have been by turning to the right by
a white house on the Bordeaux road (not far from the race-course),
but we continued along it instead for some distance, finally
turning off down a narrow lane without any sign of a hedge. After
following this for a length of time, we took the road at right
angles leading between fields covered with gorse, and later,
descending one or two steep hills with trees on either side, we
reascended and entered the ancient town of Lescar, only to dip
under the tottering walls of the ancient castle--a few minutes
later--and mount again under a narrow archway to the church.

P. Joanne in his excellent guide-book calls it "the ancient
Beneharum, destroyed about the year 841 by the Normans, rebuilt in
980 under the name of Lascurris. In the old chronicles it was
called the 'Ville Septenaire,' because it possessed, it is said,
seven churches, seven fountains, seven mills, seven woods, seven
vineyards, seven gates and seven towers on the ramparts." The
church now restored was formerly a cathedral, and there are some
fine old mosaics (11th century) to be seen under the boarding near
the altar. Jeanne d'Albret and other Bearnais sovereigns are buried
there.

The Castle is very old, though the square tower dates from the 14th
century only.

The whole town, so curious and ancient-looking, is well worth a
visit, and forms a contrast in its fallen splendour to Pau's rising
greatness, such as cannot fail to strike any intelligent observer.

Passing through the town, we took the road to the right homewards,
which joins the Bayonne route, but instead of continuing along the
latter all the way, we branched off into the route de Billeres, and
came by the Villa Lacroix and the Hotel de Londres back to the
pension.

Another road leads from the Villa Lacroix over a brook, and past
the establishment of the "Petites Soeurs des Pauvres" into the
country, and in fact to Lescar. The brook is known as the Herrere,
and by following the path to the left which runs beside it, the
"Fontaine de Marnieres" is reached. The water of this fountain is
considered very pure and strengthening, and many people drink it
daily.

The band is another attraction at Pau; twice a week in the
afternoon they play in the Place Royale, and twice in the Parc
Beaumont. The music is of a very good order, and excessively
pleasing to listen to from beneath the shade of the trees. The Parc
Beaumont is quite near the Place Royale, the principal entrance
being at the end of the Rue du Lycee, close to the Hotel Beau
Sejour.

Balloon ascents were often the chief attraction on Sundays, which
"all the world and his wife" went out to see. There is _a_ casino
in the Park, used occasionally for concerts, but _the_ casino is
behind the Hotel Gassion, and though it was hardly finished enough
for comfort when we saw it, that defect will soon doubtless be
remedied.

Polo is generally played in the "Haute Plante" (in front of the
Barracks), and bicycle races take place there also occasionally. It
is only a step from this pleasure-ground to the cemetery, and
though this nearness never affects the joy of the children on the
roundabouts or the young people swinging, yet it is another
practical example that "in the midst of life we are in death."

The Rue Bayard--on the left of the Haute Plante--leads to the
cemetery gates, and the tombs extend behind the barracks; those of
Protestants being divided from the Roman Catholics' by a carefully
kept walk leading from the right-hand corner of the first or Roman
Catholic portion!

There is a charm about this last resting-place in spite of its
mournfulness, and the many flowers load the air with a delicious
perfume. The marble statue of a Russian lady in fashionable
costume, over her tomb, is considered a fine piece of sculpture,
and many people go there simply to see it.

The two principal French churches are those of St. Martin and St.
Jacques, but the latter is in every way the more beautiful. The
"Palais de Justice" stands close to St. Jacques, but facing the
Place Duplaa, where many of the best houses are situated. The Rue
d'Orleans, communicating the Place Duplaa and the Route De Bordeaux,
contains many Good French pensions, which have been previously
mentioned.

By following the Rue St. Jacques past the church of the same name
and turning down the street which cuts it at right angles, called
the "Rue de la Fontaine", the ancient part of the town can be
reached. It may be here remarked the peculiar characteristics of
Pau, and yet probably seven visitors out of ten fail to notice it.
the other end of "Fountain Street" leads into the Rue de la
Prefecture. this is one of the very busiest streets in Pau, and if
after leaving one of the magnificent new hotels we traverse this
busy street, and then suddenly plunge down the Rue de la Fontaine
to what was once the bed of the castle fosse--where the houses are
small and dirty, and the walls and slates barely hold together, so
wretchedly old and tottering are they--where, instead of bustle and
grandeur, there is only gloom and poverty, and in place of the
enjoyment of the present, there is the longing for a lot a little
less hard in the future; we feel as though we had gone back several
centuries in as many minutes, and have a decided wish to return to
nineteenth-century civilisation again.

We did not find the rides and drives the least pleasant of our
enjoyments, and there are so many places to visit, that picnics are
plentiful as a matter of course.

The chief excursion from Pau is to Eaux Bonnes and Eaux Chaudes,
but as there is a slight danger of damp beds there--if you get any
beds at all--early in the year, we postponed this grand trip for
another time.

Another long drive is to Lourdes and back, but this we did not
take, as we meant to stop a night there later; but one day we made
up a party for Betharram, which is a long way on the same road,
and, under ordinarily kind auspices, a delightful day's outing.

If it was less pleasant than it might have been to us, the weather
had a good deal to do with it, and the other causes may develop
themselves in narration. There were ten of us, and we started in a
grand yellow brake with four horses and a surly coachman. The
morning was excessively warm, and some of the party were of such
rotund proportions, that the thin ones were nearly lost sight of,
if they chanced to sit between them, while the warmth approached to
that of a cucumber frame with the sun on it. We attracted a good
deal of attention as we _crawled_ down the Rue Serviez and passed
the entrance to the Pare Beaumont, down the hill to Bizanos; but as
soon as the chateau that takes its name from the village was
reached, we met with little admiration, except from the good people
jogging along in tumble-down carts and shandries. The peasants
seemed on the whole a good-natured lot, taking a joke with a smile
often approaching a broad grin, and occasionally, but only very
_occasionally_, attempting one in return. The following is an
instance of one of these rare occasions:--We were walking beside
the Herrere stream in the direction of the Fontaine de Marnieres;
several women were busy washing clothes at the water's edge, and
above, spread out in all their glory, were three huge umbrellas--
umbrellas of the size of those used on the Metropolitan 'buses, but
of bright blue cloth on which the presence of clay was painfully
evident. We asked the price without smiling, and the women,
wondering, looked up. We said they must be very valuable, and we
would give as much as _six sous_ for any one of them. At this
moment another woman, who had been listening to the conversation
from a little garden behind, came up and said: "Those umbrellas
belong to me, and they _are_ worth a lot of money; but I will sell
you one cheap _if you promise to send it to the Exhibition!_"

But to resume. After crossing the railway line beyond Bizanos, and
leaving the pleasant little waterfall on the right, the sun began
to pour down on us very fiercely, and all we could do, wedged in as
we were, was to appear happy and survey the country.

It was curious to note the method of training the vines up the
various trees by the roadside. The simplicity and efficacy of the
method seemed plain enough, but with memories of the difficulty
experienced in guarding our own fruit even with glass-tipped walls
to defend it, we were forced to the conviction that in the Pyrenees
fruit stealers are unknown. Perhaps, however, the "grapes are
always sour," or sufficiently high up to give the would-be thief
time to think of the penalty, which probably would be "higher"
still.

The road continues nearly in a direct line through Assat (5 miles),
but when that village was left behind, the mountains seemed to be
considerably nearer, and even the snow summits--a bad sign of rain
--appeared within a fairly easy walk.

The painful odour of garlic frequently assailed our nostrils
passing through the hamlets, and though it is not quite as bad as
the Japanese root _daikon_, yet to have to talk to a man who has
been eating it, is a positive punishment. We would fain bring about
a reform among the people, getting them to substitute some other
healthily-scented vegetable in place of the objectionable one. To
this end we composed a verse to a very old but popular tune,
styling it

"THE MARCH OF THE MEN OF GARLIC."

  Men of Garlic--large your numbers,
  Long indeed your conscience slumbers,
  Can't you change and eat cu-cumbers?
  Men of Garlic, say!
  They are sweet and tender,
  Short and thick or slender.
  Then, we know well your breath won't smell
  And sickness' pangs engender.
  Men of Garlic, stop your scorning,
  Change your food and hear our warning,
  See the day of Progress dawning,
  Give three cheers--
  Hurray!

Doubtless the fact of the verse being in English will militate
against its efficiency, but before we had time to turn it into
French, we had passed to the right of the quaint old town of Nay,
and were entering Coarraze (10 1/2 miles). As we bore off to the
right across the river, the old castle--where Henry IV. spent a
great part of his childhood like any peasant child--towered above
us, and the scenery around became considerably more picturesque
than any we had passed through that morning. The banks of the river
were more shapely, and the alternation of bushes and meadow, with
the varying lights and shades on the distant peaks and the nearer
slopes, would have seemed more than beautiful, if our wedged
positions and the accompanying warmth had not somewhat evaporated
our admiration. Though the heat remained, the sun had disappeared
behind huge banks of clouds, as we at length entered Betharram (15
miles), so, instead of pulling up at the hotel, we drove on to the
beautiful ivy-hung bridge, a great favourite with artists. This
really belongs to the hamlet of Lestelle, which adjoins Betharram,
and is so picturesque that the villagers ought to be proud of it;
doubtless in the old days, when Notre Dame de Betharram's shrine
was the cherished pilgrimage--now superseded by the attractions of
N. D. de Lourdes--many thousand "holy" feet crossed and recrossed
this ancient bridge!

In order to reach the hotel we had to ascend slightly to turn the
vehicle, much to the consternation of one of the party, who,
clasping the back rail with both hands and endeavouring to look
brave, could not withhold a small scream which escaped from the
folds of her veil.

The dining-room of the hotel smelt decidedly close, so we spread
our sumptuous lunch on tables outside; but Jupiter Pluvius soon
showed his disapproval of our plans, and forced us to go within,
where a fine specimen of a French soldier had done his best to fill
the place with smoke. However, we managed fairly well, in spite of
some sour wine which we tried, under the name of "Jurancon vieux,"
for the "good of the house" and the "worse of ourselves." As the
rain passed off ere we had finished, we afterwards repaired to the
"Via Crucis," where there is a small chapel at every turn till the
"Calvary" is reached at the summit. The first chapel is beside the
road, midway between the hotel and the bridge, and the view from
the summit on a fine day is said to be very good; but when only
half-way, the rain came down in such torrents that we were glad to
return to the inn for shelter. For two hours the downpour lasted,
but it cooled the air and rendered the return journey a little more
supportable; and when we arrived at the house, we also arrived at
the decision that never again to a picnic, as far as we were
concerned, should thinness and rotundity go side by side!

There is no doubt that a landau is the most comfortable vehicle for
a drive of any length, although some very comfortable little T-
carts, with good ponies between the shafts, can be hired too. We
often used the latter for drives to Assat and over the suspension-
bridge--so old and shaky--and home by Gelos and Jurancon; while at
other times, taking the necessaries for afternoon tea, we drove as
far as Nay, crossing the river to enter its ancient square--in
which stand the Townhall and the Maison Carree, of historical fame
--and then leaving the tanneries and houses behind, sought some
quiet spot down by the water, for sketching and enjoying our tea.

Rides or drives on the coteaux (hills) in the vicinity are very
pleasant, as the views from certain points are particularly fine.
Of these the most popular is to Perpignaa, two hours being
sufficient for the drive there and back. It is a nice walk for an
average pedestrian, and the road is easy to find. We generally
started in the afternoon, passing across the bridge and through
Jurancon, and where the road forks, bearing along the Gan road to
the right. Then, taking the first turning to the right, leading
between fields, we reached an avenue of trees, with a village
beyond. We then followed the road across the bridge to the left,
and kept bearing in that direction till we reached the foot of the
coteau, where there is only one route, and consequently no chance
of taking any but the right one! We heard of a case of two young
ladies going off in a donkey cart, intending to sketch the view
above Perpignaa, who, when they reached the avenue, turned down to
the right and wandered along the bank of the Gave as far as the
donkey would go, and then sketched a church steeple in despair. But
such a mistake is quite unnecessary; and they would doubtless have
remedied theirs, if they had not found it obligatory at last to
push behind in order to make the donkey move homewards. Although
very hoarse and tired when they arrived, they had voice enough left
to say they "wouldn't go sketching in a donkey cart again!"

From the foot of the hill the road zigzags, making a fairly easy
gradient to the summit, on which stands a house whose owner kindly
allows visitors to walk about his grounds and participate in the
view. When riding, we followed the road that continues on the right
for several miles, in order to prolong the pleasure produced by the
exercise and the view.

Another pleasant ride is by way of the coteaux to Gan, and back by
the road, or _vice versa_; but we always preferred the former, as
the horses had the hill work while fresh, and then the level home.
In the first instance we found this track by accident. We had
passed through Jurancon, and at the spot where the road forks
debated which to take, finally deciding on the left one, but this
we only followed for a few yards, taking again the first turning to
the right, which brought us over the railway line direct to the
hills. Winding up through the trees, we passed a tricyclist pushing
his machine before him, who informed us that we were on the way to
Gan. Of this, after we had ridden up and down, wound round
hillsides and passed through pleasant dingles, we were at length
assured by descending into that village, from which we got safely
home in spite of a "bolting" attempt on the part of one of the
"fiery" steeds.

To thoroughly enjoy the longer drive to Pietat it is better to make
a picnic of it. We started about ten one lovely morning, turning to
the left beyond Jurancon, crossing the line to Oloron--on the main
road--and later on, bearing more round in the same direction, and
beginning to ascend. As on the hills to Gan, we were perpetually
mounting only to descend a great part of the distance again, but
ever and anon catching glimpses of the valley in which Assat and
Nay lay, and of Pau itself, besides the lovely snow hills
stretching as far as eye could reach. When Pietat was arrived at,
there was but little to interest us in what we saw there of a half-
finished church and two cottages; but the view on all sides after
we had walked along the grassy plateau was very lovely, especially
as the lights and shades were everywhere so perfect. Having
selected a cosy spot and spread the luncheon, we were besieged by
children anxious to sell us flowers and apples, and to share
whatever we would give them. They were hard to get rid of even with
promises of something when we had finished, and when at last they
did go, an elderly female took their place with most generous
offers of unlocking the church for us. There was an old sweet-toned
bell in front of the western door, and a half-finished sculpture of
the "Descent from the Cross" over it. The interior of the edifice
was sufficiently roofed for a portion to be utilised for prayer,
and the high altar and two lateral ones were already erected.

After culling a quantity of the beautiful feather moss from the
hedgerows, we re-entered the carriage, and descended the hill into
the Gave valley, crossing the suspension-bridge by Assat, and
through the village into the main road, and home by Bizanos. It was
the time of the carnival, and on the following day Bizanos--which
has an evil repute for bad egg-throwing on festive occasions--was
to be the scene of the mumming. Luckily they did not attempt to
practise on us, though as we drove up through the town we met bands
of gaily-dressed individuals parading the streets.

These bands consisted of about thirty, mostly men decked in a
preponderance of red, white, and blue, and usually accompanied by a
tableau arrangement on a cart. Every twenty yards they stopped,
went through a series of antics, supposed to be country dances, to
the tune of the cornet and a fiddle, and then brought round the
hat, frequently embracing any woman who objected to give her sous.

A carnival such as this combines a holiday with money-making to the
mummers, and as long as they can get money in this fashion, they
certainly cannot be blamed for taking their amusement in such a
highly practical manner.

There are several private coaches at Pau, which turn out in grand
style on race days; and balls, concerts, and kettledrums abound,
with private theatricals occasionally. We attempted to get up "Poor
Pillicoddy," but were very unlucky about it. Firstly, when in full
rehearsal, our Mrs. O'Scuttle became unwell, and we had to look for
another, and when we had found her and were getting into shape
again, her nautical husband put the whole ship on the rocks and
wrecked our hopes by losing his voice.

However, our departure was very nigh, and packing is an excellent
cure for disappointment, though we were interrupted in that one
morning with a request to write "something" in the visitors' book.
With the memories of our pleasant stay upon us, we do not think we
can err in reproducing one contribution, which was styled

"IDYLLIC COLBERT."

(_With apologies to_ Mr. W. S. GILBERT.)

  If you're anxious for to dwell in a very fine hotel
  By the mountain's wide expanse,
  You at once had best repair to that house so good though
    _chere_
  Called the "Grand Hotel de France."
  Or if for food your craze is, you still can give your praises
  To the _chef_ of its cuisine_.
  Your taste you need not fetter, for 'tis said in Pau, no better
  Has ever yet been seen.
  But this I have to say, you will not like your stay
  As much as if at Pension Colbert you the time had spent,
  And such a time, I'm very sure, you never would repent.

  If I'm eloquent in praise of those most peculiar days
  Which now have passed away,
  'Tis to tell you, as a man, what awful risks I ran
  Lest my heart should chance to stray.
  I never would pooh-pooh! 'tis cruel so to do,
  Though often weak and ill,
  For they my plaints would stop, with a juicy mutton-chop,
  Or a mild and savoury pill!
  And this I have to say, you're bound to like your stay,
  And never in your life I'm very sure will you repent
  The time in Pension Colbert's walls and well-trimmed
    garden spent.

  And if a tantalizing passion of a gay lawn tennis fashion
  Should fire your love of sport,
  On the neat and well-kept lawn, a net that's _never_ torn
  Hangs quiv'ring o'er the court.
  Or if your voice you'd raise in sweet or high-tun'd lays,
  You'll find a piano there,
  And _birdies_ too will sing, like mortals--that's a thing
  You'll never hear elsewhere--
  And then you're bound to say that you have liked your stay,
  And never in your life I'm very sure will you repent
  The time in Pension Colbert's walls and well-trimm'd
    garden spent.

  If for hunting you've a liking, you can don a costume striking,
  And proceed to chase the fox.
  Or if you're fond of driving, _perhaps_ by some contriving
  You may mount a coach's box.
  If picnics are your pleasure, you can go to them at leisure,
  And lunch on sumptuous fare,
  And though maybe, perforce, you'll get lamb without mint
    sauce.
  They never starve you there.
  And always you will say, that you've enjoyed your stay,
  And never in your life I'm very sure will you repent
  The time in Pension Colbert's walls and well-trimm'd
    garden spent.

As Mrs. and Miss Blunt and Mr. Sydney had definitely decided to
spend the time at Biarritz while I stayed at Bigorre, I turned my
attention to discovering if any other acquaintances were proceeding
in the same direction as myself. In this I was successful, and in
company with Mr. H---- and his two daughters, and Mrs. Willesden
and Miss Leonards, bade "au revoir" to Pau, with the prospect of a
long spell of beautiful scenery if the clerk of the weather could
only be controlled, by longings and hopes.




CHAPTER II.

BAGNERES DE BIGORRE.

Backward Spring--Hotel Beau Sejour--Effect of the war of '70 on the
English Colony--The "Coustous"--The Church of St. Vincent--
Geruzet's Marble Works--Donkeys--Up the Monne--Bains de Sante--
Bains de Grand Pre--Salut Avenue and Baths--"Ai-ue, Ai-ue"--
Luncheon--Daffodils--The Summit and the View--The "Castle-Mouly"--
The Tapere--Mde. Cottin--Mont Bedat--Gentians--The Croix de Manse--
"The Lady's Farewell to her Asinine Steed"--Market-day--The Old
Iron and Shoe Dealers--Sunday--A Cat Fight--The English Church--To
the Col d'Aspin--"The Abbe's Song"--Baudean--Campan, its People and
Church--Wayside Chapels--Ste. Marie--The route to Gripp, &c.--
Payole--The Pine Forest--The Col d'Aspin--The View from the Monne
Rouge--"The Plaint of the Weather-beaten Pine"--The Menu at Payole
--Hurrah for the Milk!--Departures--Divine Music--Aste--Gabrielle
d'Estrelle--The Ivied Ruins--The Church--Pitton de Tournefort--
Gerde--The Pigeon Traps--The Cattle Market--The Jacobin Tower--
Theatre--Grand Etablissement des Thermes--Hospice Civil--Eglise des
Carmes--Mount Olivet--Madame Cheval, her Cakes and Tea--Bigorre in
Tears.


We had a bright day for our journey to Bigorre, and the country
looked pretty, though very backward for April, but this was owing
to the late frosts, which had been felt everywhere. Bigorre itself
was no exception, and instead of all the charms of spring ready to
welcome us, the leaves were only just taking courage to unfurl. Our
first impressions were consequently anything but favourable, though
our comfortable quarters in the Hotel Beau Sejour compensated us to
a certain degree. To the French and Spaniards, Bigorre is only a
summer resort, but as it is considered to possess a very mild
climate, many English reside there all the year round. In fact,
before the war of 1870 there was quite an English colony there, but
the chance of a Prussian advance dispersed it, and many were the
hardships endured by some of those who had stayed to the last
moment, in their endeavours to reach the coast.

Our first two days were more or less wet, and by reports of heavy
snowstorms around us, we were unanimously of opinion that we had
come too early. However, with a little sun the place soon began to
look more cheerful, and a few days' fine weather wrought quite a
change.

The hotel looks down on the Place Lafayette and the commencement of
the avenue known as the "Coustous." This name puzzled us! We tried
to find its derivation in French, without success, and Greek and
German were no better. Latin seemed to solve the difficulty with
the word "Custos," since it is said that the ancient guardians of
the town formerly marched up and down beneath these fine old trees;
so we decided to hunt no further but to translate "Coustous" into
the "Guards' Walk." Having settled that knotty point, we took a
stroll in the avenue, and later, paid a visit to the parish church
of St. Vincent which is close by. It is particularly chaste inside,
some portions dating from the 14th century, but the 15th and 16th
have each had a share in the construction. Some of the altars are
made of fine Pyrenean marble, and the Empress Eugenie is said to
have given the wooden image of the Virgin on the pedestal.

As the various marbles obtained in the vicinity are exceedingly
interesting, and in many cases very beautiful, a very pleasant
half-hour can be spent at one of the many marble works which the
town possesses. Fired with this idea ourselves, one gloomy day
after lunch we sallied from the hotel, down the road to the left of
the church, through the public gardens, and--attracted by the
marble pillar--down the lane to the right of it, which at length
brought us to the works of Monsieur Geruzet. The huge blocks of the
rough stone were first inspected, then we saw the various processes
of cutting, ornamenting and polishing, and finally were ushered
into the showroom, where all kinds of articles from a sleeve-stud
to a sideboard were on sale. The cigar-trays and letterweights were
most reasonable, but it is not necessary to buy at all--and
gratuities are not supposed to be permitted.

There were some fine turn-outs in the donkey line which deserve
notice, the peculiarity of these animals here being, to go where
they are wanted, and even to trot about it. Looking out of the
window one morning, we were immediately attracted by the tiniest of
donkeys galloping across the "place" with two big men behind it;
and later on in the day, a neat specimen of the same tribe passed
down the "Coustous," dragging a small dogcart, almost completely
filled by the form of a French female, two or three times as large
as her donkey.

But like other things, the "genus asininus" is very variable,
almost as much so as the barometer, and those "on hire" for riding
purposes were quite as obstinate as their relations in other
countries; at least so the ladies declared who tried them, and they
ought to know. Their bitter experience was gained in a trip up the
Monne, the highest mountain in the immediate vicinity, being 2308
feet above Bigorre, or 4128 above the sea. Our party was seven in
all, supplemented by a broken-winded and coughing horse (called
Towser; French, _Tousseux_), two very obstinate donkeys, and a
particularly polite donkey boy. Add to these, three luncheon-
baskets and various sticks, umbrellas, and parasols, and the
cavalcade is complete. We left the hotel and passed up the Coustous
in rather mixed order, which improved as we turned into the Rue
d'Alsace, and leaving the Great Bathing Establishment [Footnote:
Grand Etablissement de Thermes.] and French Protestant Church on
the right, and the Baths of Sante and Grand Pre on the left,
entered the "Salut" avenue, which in due time brought us to the
baths of the same name. The ascent, which by the road is most
circuitous and easy, commences from thence. But though easy, the
donkeys did not attempt to conceal their dislike for the work at a
very early stage, and when the blasting in the quarries was hushed,
"the voice of the charmer" (i.e. donkey boy) might have been heard,
painfully resembling the sounds made by the traveller with his head
over the vessel's side, urging them on, "Ai-ue--Ai-ue." As we
rounded the last of the minor peaks, "the keen demands of appetite"
were not to be resisted; so on a nice green plateau, with the
object of our desires in full view, we discussed the luncheon.
Shawls were spread, plates handed round, bottles gurglingly
uncorked, and chicken and "pate de foie gras" distributed until
everyone was steadily at work. The mountain air seemed to affect
the "vin ordinaire"; everyone averred it was as good as "Margaux,"
while the chicken was voted delicious, and the pate superb.

This important business over, a start was again made, and though
the donkeys were still obstinate, we managed to make progress.
Daffodils were growing in profusion as we neared the summit, making
the hill crest seem crowned with gold. At last, after one or two
nasty narrow bits of path, barely affording sufficient footing for
the animals, we gained the top, anxious to enjoy the view.
Unhappily, the tips of the highest peaks were hidden in the clouds,
but the general view was excellent, so we endeavoured to be
content. With our backs to Bigorre, we had the Pic du Midi (9440
ft.) and the Montaigu (7681 ft.) right before us, with the small
Val de Serris and the finer Val de Lesponne beneath. More to the
left, the continuation of the Campan Valley leading to Luchon, in
which, as far as Ste. Marie, the route is visible. On the extreme
left lay the four villages of Gerde, Aste, Baudean and Campan, with
the Pene de l'Heris (5226 ft.) and the Ordincede rearing above
them. Looking in the direction of Bigorre, we could see on our
right the trees fringing the hills above Gerde, and known as the
Palomieres; and slightly to the left Lourdes and its lake, with the
entrance to the Argeles valley further round in the same direction
and close to the wooded hill known as the Castel Mouly (3742 ft.).
The Tapere (a small stream) flows from this last-named hill into a
narrow glen, on the left side of which Madame Cottin wrote the
"Exiles of Siberia." The hill above, known as "Mont Bedat," and
surmounted with a statue of the Virgin, is a favourite walk from
the town, the ascent for a moderate walker taking about forty-five
minutes.

After twenty minutes to enjoy this panorama we began the descent on
the Castel-Mouly side, and were very soon forced to make short and
sometimes slippery cuts, to avoid the banks of snow lying in the
path. We easily managed to strike the proper path again, however,
and soon found ourselves at our "luncheon plateau." We now bore
along to the left, finding several large gentians, and gradually,
by dint of short cuts, we reached the Croix de Manse--a plateau
where four roads meet. Taking the one leading from the Bedat, we
were soon deposited at the hotel in safety.

The ladies were inexpressibly glad to give up their donkeys, and
Miss Leonards considered her experiences so bitter as to wish them
to be handed down to posterity under the title of

"THE LADY'S FAREWELL TO HER ASININE STEED."

  My donkey steed! my donkey steed! that standest slyly by,
  With thy ill-combed mane and patchy neck--thy brown and
    cunning eye,
  I will not mount the Monne's height, or tread the gentle
    mead
  Upon thy back again: oh slow and wretched donkey steed!

  The sun may rise, the sun may set, but ne'er again on thee,
  Will I repeat the sorry ride from which at length I'm free;
  I'd sooner walk ten thousand times, though walking would
    be vain,
  Than ever mount, my donkey steed, upon thy back again.

  Perchance in _nightmare's_ fitful dreams thou'lt amble into
    sight,
  Perchance once more thy cunning eye will turn on me its
    light.
  Again I'll raise my parasol--_in vain_--to make thee speed,
  A parasol is nought to thee, my wretched donkey steed.

  'Twas only when at my request some kindly hand would
    chide,
  Or sharply thrust a pointed stick against thy shaggy side,
  That the slow blood that in thee runs would quicken once
    again,
  For though my parasol I broke, my efforts _still_ were vain.

  Did I ill use thee? Surely not! such things could never be!
  Although thou wentest slowest when I fain would haste to
    tea.
  Creeping at snail's pace only--while I couldn't make thee
    learn
  That donkeys' legs were never made to stop at ev'ry turn.

  At ev'ry turn!--such weary work--I knew not what to do:
  Oh nevermore!--no, nevermore!--would I that ride renew.
  How very wide thy jaws were kept--how far thrown back
    thine ears,
  As though to make me think thee ill and fill my soul with
    fears.
  Safe and unmounted will I roam with stately step alone,
  No more to feel, on thee, such pains and aches in ev'ry bone:
  And if I rest beside a well, perchance I'll pause and think,
  How even if I'd brought thee there, I couldn't make thee
    drink.

  I couldn't even make thee move! Away, the ride is o'er!
  Away! for I shall rue the day on which I see thee more!
  They said thou wert so meek and good, and I'm not over
    strong,
  I took their _kind_ advice, but oh! their _kind_ advice was
    _wrong._

  Who said I'd gladly give thee up? Who said that thou
    were old?
  'Tis true! 'tis true! my donkey steed! and I alas was _sold._
  With joy I see thy form depart--that form which ne'er again
  Shall bear me up the mountain-side and fill my soul with
    pain.

After such a potent warning posterity will doubtless avoid "donkey
steeds" altogether.

Saturday is the great market-day of the week, and not only then is
the "Place de Strasbourg," at the end of the "Rue du Centre," well
crowded, but even--as happens on no other day--the Place Lafayette,
in front of the hotel, and the top of the Coustous as well. The
first-named is the fruit, flower, and vegetable market; the second,
the grain and potato; and the third, the iron and old shoe market.
The amount and variety of old iron and cast-off shoes exposed for
sale is astonishing. And if the vendors were given to crying their
wares they might indulge in something like the following--of course
translated:--

  "Now who's for an 'upper,' a 'heel,' or a 'sole'?
  This way for some fine rusty chain!
  The sum of ten halfpence will purchase the whole,
  And surely you cannot complain!

  "Just glance at this slipper, whose fellow is lost;
  Here's a boot that was only worn thrice;
  A hammer, your honour, at half what it cost;
  I'm sure that's a reasonable price."

The curious characters loafing, begging, buying and selling, quite
defy description, though the resemblance of many to the ape tribe
was conspicuous. One ancient individual, presiding over an
"umbrella hospital," presented an interesting spectacle surrounded
by _adult_ shoe-blacks whose trade did not appear to be too
lucrative.

Sunday is usually a very quiet day out of the season, but on our
first Sunday morning the Place de Strasbourg was the scene of a
real cat-fight. The combatants quite tabooed spitting and
scratching, and went to work with their teeth. After a few squeaks
and a great deal of rolling in the dust, a magnanimous dog appeared
on the scene, and after separating them, pursued the victor down
the street. The rest of the day, as usual, passed peacefully, and
the pleasant services in the pretty little English Church were much
enjoyed. It is situated near Dussert and Labal's marble works, just
off the Rue des Pyrenees, leading to Campan, about a hundred yards
beyond the Coustous, and is reached by crossing a small wooden
bridge.

Monday broke very fine, and as the market people had notified that
the Col d'Aspin was now open, we made up a party of ten, just
filling two landaus, for this fifteen-mile drive. We did not start
till eleven, and by that time the clouds had commenced to show
themselves, but hoping for better things, we went ahead. Following
the Campan road, we soon left Gerde and the Palomieres above it, in
the distance, and in a few moments the village of Aste as well. A
little further on we met a barouche, lolling back in which sat a
priest. His hands were clasped o'er his breast, his spectacled eyes
were fixed upwards, and judging by the expression of his mouth and
the movement of his lips, he was endeavouring to put some pleasant,
self-contented thoughts into words. We took the liberty of guessing
what he was saying, and set it down as

"THE ABBE'S SONG."

  Oh! I am an Abbe, an Abbe am I,
  And I'm fond of my dinner and wine.
  Some say I'm a sinner, but that I deny,
  And I never am heard to repine.
  'Tis said what a pity I can't have a wife,
  But I'm saved from the _chance_ of all naggings and strife,
  While in my barouche I can ride where I will,
  Feeling life not half bad, though the world may be ill.

  I always wear glasses, but that's to look sage,
  And not 'cause my eyesight is dim,
  For when sweet maids I view of a loveable age,
  I contrive to look over the rim.
  And when I'm alone with the glass at my lips,
  I am ready to swear, as I pause 'twixt the sips,
  That as long as the world does not hamper my will,
  I think I can manage to live in it still.

A short distance before reaching Baudean a road strikes to the
right up the Vallon de Serris, and a short distance beyond,
another, in the same direction, strikes up the Vallee de Lesponne,
_en route_ for the Lac Bleu (6457 ft.) and the Montaigu (7681 ft.).
When Baudean and its quaint old church were left in our rear, and
we were nearing Campan, we witnessed a fierce struggle between a
young bull-calf and a native. The calf objected very strongly to
the landaus, and wished to betake itself to the adjacent country to
avoid them. To this the native very naturally objected in turn, and
a struggle was the result, in which the calf was worsted and
reduced to order.

Campan is a curious old town, with a quaint marketplace, whose roof
rests on well-worn stone pillars. Turning a corner, we came on a
somewhat mixed collection of men, women, oxen, and logs of wood.
The French flag was fixed against a tree, and painted on a board
underneath it were the familiar words, "debit de tabac," with an
arrow or two pointing round the corner, but no tobacco shop was in
sight.

The peasants thronged the windows as we drove down the street, but
the greater number were weird and decrepit females, with faces like
the bark of an ancient oak-tree.

The old church, which stands near the market-place is well worth a
visit. Passing under an archway on the right side of the road, we
entered a court-yard, in which stands a marble statue erected in
honour of the late cure, and on the right of this is the entrance
into the church.

After leaving Campan the road ascends slightly through several
small hamlets, each possessing a proportionately small chapel at
the wayside, till Ste. Marie (2965 ft.) is reached. Here the road
bifurcates, the branch to the right leading to Gripp, Tramesaigues,
the Col du Tourmalet, and Bareges; the branch to the left, along
which we continued, to the Col d'Aspin, Arreau, Borderes, Col de
Peyresourde (5070 ft.), and Luchon (2065 ft.). From Ste. Marie the
grandeur of the scenery increases. Besides the Montaigu and the Pic
du Midi on the right, on the left are the Pene de l'Heris (5226
ft.) and the Crete d'Ordincede (5358 ft. about), with their wooded
crests uplifted above the range of lower hills, dotted with the
huts of the shepherds. Still ascending slightly, we passed Payole
(3615 ft.), where a head thrust out of the window of the Hotel de
la Poste showed us it was at any rate occupied, and as we drove
past at a good pace, visions of a pleasant tea rose before us.

[Illustration: THE PINE FOREST NEAR THE COL D'ASPIN.]

We were soon mounting the zigzags through the splendid pine woods,
and enjoyed the delicious glimpses down the deep moss-grown glades,
with the scent of the rising sap in our nostrils. The glimpses on
the mountains up and down the road were very felicitous also. On
emerging from the forest the road was rather narrow for the
carriage for several yards, the snow being two to three feet deep
on either side, but as soon as this was passed, another three-
quarter mile of open driving brought us to the Col d'Aspin (4920
ft.). The view from this spot is very fine, but to really enjoy the
scenery to the fullest extent, we mounted the crest on the left,
called the Monne Rouge (5759 ft.), and were well rewarded.
Although, as too often happens, the highest peaks were in the mist,
we could see the whole extent of the valleys, and the tops of the
lower mountains. The range of sight is magnificent; the Maladetta
(10,866 ft.) only just visible to the east, the huge Posets (11,047
ft.) standing out frowningly to the south-south-east, as well as
the Pez (10,403 ft.) and the Clarabide (10,254 ft. about), and many
others. While not only the valley of Seoube, just passed through,
and the valley of Aure, in which Arreau lies, are visible, but to
the northwest even the plain of the Garonne as well. As the clouds
were gradually obscuring the scene, we made our way at a smart pace
through the pines back towards the inn at Payole. One weather-
beaten old fir, hung with lichen, devoid of all its former garb of
green, seemed to appeal to us for pity; we noticed it both when
ascending and descending, and its misery at dying when all the
trees around were growing anew, we have set down as

"THE PLAINT OF THE WEATHER-BEATEN PINE."

  Behold I stand by the Aspin road, an old and worn-out Pine,
  The years I cannot recollect that make this life of mine:
  The snows have fallen o'er my crest, the winds have whistled
    high,
  For tens of years the winter's frost I managed to defy;
  But now the fiat has gone forth, the flame of life is dead,
  And nevermore I'll feel the storms that beat about my head.

  I've watch'd the carriage travellers pass so gaily on their
    way,
  I've heard the capercailzie's note at early dawning grey;
  But now, alas! my doom is sealed, I have not long to wait,
  For when the axe has laid me low the fire will be my fate.
  Farewell to sun, farewell to storm, to birds and travellers all,
  --Oh sad to think that one so great should have so great a
    fall!

As some of the party had gone on earlier, we found the table spread
when we reached the Inn de la Poste; and after a warm at the
kitchen fire proceeded to discuss the repast, of which the
following is the _menu_:--

MENU.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUP.

Tea._

FISH.

Cold Minnows.

ROASTS.

Remains of Cold Chicken. Remains of Pate de Foie Gras.

COLD.

Household _Bread_--very sour.

MADE DISH.

_Butter._

SWEETS.

Sponge Biscuits.

DESSERT.

Apples and Oranges.

WINES AND LIQUEURS.

Vin Ordinaire, Water with very little Whisky, Kirschwasser.

We were unable to procure any addition to our meal from the
innkeeper, except sour bread and sugar. Our tea had to be drank
without milk, as the cow had gone for a stroll up the mountain and
was out of reach of the post-office. Having suggested to our host
that a telegram might be of use, he disappeared grinning, and in
about ten minutes the servant entered with a bottle containing the
precious liquid. The shout of joy that rose to the rafters rather
startled the quiet female, but it was spontaneous, not to be
suppressed, and told of a happy finish to our not over sumptuous
tea.

The drive from thence home was decidedly chilly, but nothing
exciting happened, though occasional glimpses of the snow peaks
were enjoyed, and many fine specimens of the genus bovus, dragging
carts laden with trees (or all that remained of them), were passed
by the way.

The entire excursion occupied six hours and a half.

A few days afterwards our sociable circle at the hotel was much
reduced, and among others the Clipper family departed. We missed
Mr. Clipper greatly, for though bearing strong evidence to Darwin's
theory about the face, he was a chatty companion and capital
"raconteur," while his facility for remembering names, even of
places visited in his youngest days, was really remarkable.

Nor could we easily spare the four sylph-like Misses Clipper, for
with them vanished all hopes of delicious music in the evening. Ah,
that was music! The way they played together the "Taking of Tel-el-
Kebir" took us by storm. The silent march through the dead of
night, the charge, the cheers, the uncertain rifle fire, and then
the thunder of the cannon was so effective, that the landlord rose
in haste from his dinner, and anxiously inquired if the pier-glass
had fallen through the piano; reassured, he went back to his meal,
but whether the "taking of the redoubt," or the "pursuit of the
fugitives," or even the capital imitation of the bagpipes--which
followed in due course--interfered with his digestion (it might
have been a regard for his piano), we never learnt, but his face
showed unmistakable signs of annoyance for the rest of the evening.

The next morning--which was Saturday--Miss Leonards, Mrs.
Willesden, and myself took a walk to the villages of Aste and
Gerde. They lie on the opposite side of the river Adour, and are
within an easy walk. The market people were coming in a continuous
stream along the Campan road, some in long carts crowded sardine-
like, some in traps, some on donkeys, but the majority on foot. We
stopped two of the most crowded carts and asked them to make room
for us. The inmates of the former took it as a joke and drove off
chuckling; but those in the second took the matter-of-fact view and
began squeezing about, till, having a space of about four inches by
three, one man said he thought they could manage; however, not
wishing to "sit familiar," we thanked him, but declined to trouble
him any further.

The first bridge over the river, built of stone, leads to Gerde and
Aste, but we preferred to take the longer route, which continues
along the Campan road, till, after passing several smaller wooden
bridges, it turns to the left between two houses over an iron
bridge, and strikes straight into Aste. Before entering the town we
glanced over in the direction of Campan, and caught a fine glimpse
of the Houn Blanquo (6411 ft.), and the Pic du Midi, with a bit of
the Montaigu. Aste is interesting, formerly a fief of the Grammont
family; it has been associated with not a few celebrated
characters, and though that does not enhance the value of the
surrounding property (since the Grammont estate is now in the
market), yet of course it renders the village more worthy of a
visit.

The picturesque and ivy-covered ruin is all that remains of the
feudal castle where Gabrielle d'Estrelle [Footnote: So the oldest
inhabitant said!] lived and loved, and whither the renowned Henry
IV. (the object of that love) came over from his castle at Pau on
frequent visits.

The church, with its Campan marble porch, is celebrated for the
image of the Virgin which it contains, and which is greatly
reverenced in the neighbourhood.

Aste was honoured with a long visit from Pitton de Tournefort, a
celebrated French naturalist, and the fact is commemorated by an
engraved tablet affixed to the house in which he passed his nights.

The tablet is on the left-hand side of the main street (going
towards Gerde), and the inscription--which is in verse--runs as
follows:--

"Pitton de Tournefort dans cet humble reduit,
De ses fatigues de jour se reposait la nuit.
Lorsqu' explorant nos monts qu'on ignorait encore,
Ce grand homme tressait la couronne de flore."

MDCCCXXXII. M.B.

Which might be translated--

"Pitton de Tournefort when tired for the day,
In this hole made his bed, on a shakedown of hay.
Our hills, long despised, he was pleased to explore,
And we thank him for lib'rally paying the score!"

1832.

Taking the path leading to the right, we managed by dint of a
little wading to reach Gerde, a village possessing little internal
interest besides the neat church, but otherwise known to fame from
the "palomieres," or pigeon-traps, worked between the trees which
fringe the hills above it. During the autumn, when the pigeons are
migrating, huge nets are spread between the trees, and on the approach
of a flock, men, perched in a lofty "crow's nest," throw out a large
wooden imitation of a hawk, at the sight of which the pigeons dip in
their flight and rush into the nets, which--worked on the pulley
system--immediately secure them. There are three species taken in the
traps: the wood pigeon, the ringed wood pigeon, and the wild dove.

Leaving Gerde by the principal thoroughfare, we came back to
Bagneres by the Toulouse road, passing the Cattle Market--held in a
triangular space shaded with trees--on the left; and the Geruzet
Marble Works, and later the Parish Church, on the right.

[Illustration: PALOMIERES DE GERDE.]

With the exception of the baths or Thermes, we did not find many
places of interest in the town. The old Jacobin tower, surmounted
by a clock, in the Rue de l'Horloge, is all that remains of a
convent built in the 15th century, but is in a good state of
preservation. The theatre is part of what was formerly the "Chapel
of St. John," used by the Templars. The porch over the doorway was
erected in the 13th century, and is of the Transition style,
utterly incongruous to the use now made of it; but this kind of
sacrilege is unhappily now becoming of common occurrence! Leaving
the theatre, in a short space we were in the "Place des Thermes,"
where the New Casino is being built among the shrubs on the right.
The "Grand Etablissement," which occupies the centre of the
"Place," contains seven different springs, and there is another in
the circular building outside, the latter being only used for
drinking purposes. On the first floor of the building are the
library (to the left), the geological room (in the centre), and the
picture gallery (to the right). The corridors leading to the first
and last are panelled with good specimens of the Pyrenean marbles,
and in the same room with the pictures is a supposed model of a
section of the Pyrenees--anybody gaining any information from it
deserves a prize.

To the left of this establishment stands the "Hospice Civil," a
fine building in grey stone.

The Carmelite Church, on the left of the road leading to Mount
Olivet, where several pleasant villas are situated, is now closed,
the "order" having been dispersed two years ago; so nothing is to
be seen there of interest except the sculpture representing the
"miracle of the loaves" over the door.

One institution must not be forgotten, viz, the afternoon tea or
coffee at Madame Cheval's. This good lady presides over a
confectioner's shop opposite the end of the Hotel (Beau Sejour), in
the Rue du Centre. Her cakes and coffee are good, and, thanks to
our enlightened instructions, anyone taking some tea to her can
have it properly made, and be provided with the necessary adjuncts
for enjoying it; cream even being attainable if ordered the
previous day. We spent many a pleasant half-hour there, and can
well recommend others to follow our example.

Towards the end of the month Mr. H---- and his daughters moved on
to Luchon, as their time was limited; and the last week saw the
departure of Mrs. Willesden and Miss Leonards for England, whereat
Bigorre was as tearful and miserable as a steady downpour could
make it. I had serious thoughts of moving on to Luchon for two or
three days myself, and a driver who had brought two men thence over
the Col d'Aspin, offered to take me back for twenty francs, but
learning next day that there were five feet of snow on the Col, and
that Luchon was wretchedly cold, I decided to wait till later on, a
decision in no way regretted.

Although during the latter part of our stay the weather was
agreeable, and the influence of spring manifest, I was not sorry
when the day for moving forward arrived, and though Madame Cheval,
when I broke the news to her over my solitary cup of coffee, looked
as concerned as she could, and murmured something to the effect
that "all her customers were going away," yet with the assurance
that some day soon a party of us would pay her a visit, she managed
to smile again!




CHAPTER III.

LOURDES.

The Journey to Tarbes--The Buffet and the Nigger--Lourdes Station
in the Wet--Importunate "Cochers"--Hotel des Pyrenees--"Red tape"
and Porters--Lourdes in Sunshine--Sightseeing--The "Rue de la
Grotte"--"The Cry of the Lourdes Shopkeepers"--Candle-sellers--The
Grotto--Abject Reverence--The Church--St. Bernard--Interior of
Church--The Panorama--Admirable Effect--Rue du Fort--The Castle--
The View from the Tower--Pie de Mars, or Ringed Ousels.


The railway run from Bigorre to Lourdes is by no means a long one,
the actual distance being only twenty-six and a quarter miles, and
actual time in the train about one and a half hours, but the break
at Tarbes considerably prolongs it.

The early morning had been wet, and showers continued till the
afternoon, but the sun condescended to come out as the train wound
slowly out of the station, and the lights and shades up the valley
and hillsides were delightful. Having the anticipatory pleasure of
meeting Mrs. and Miss Blunt and Mr. Sydney again at Lourdes; and a
lovely view of the beauties of spring when I looked out of the
window, the time did not take long to pass. One particularly pretty
bit of meadow, trees, and stream led to the building of an airy
castle, which the sudden appearance of the spires and roofs of
Tarbes--suggesting the return to bustle and the haunts of men--soon
banished, and the arrival in the station and the necessary change
eradicated completely.

Thirty-five minutes to wait. Too little to see the town, too much
for twiddling one's thumbs. Then what? Glorious inspiration! The
Buffet! Capital; and into the Buffet I accordingly went. Seated at
a table, a nigger, slightly white about the finger tips, but
otherwise quite genuine--no Moore and Burgess menial--appeared to
do my bidding. "What would Monsieur take? Cafe?"--"Oui." "Cafe noir
ou cafe au lait?" I decided on taking the coffee with milk, adding
that anything in the biscuit line would not be amiss, and away he
went grinning. He soon returned with cakes and coffee, and by dint
of taking my time I had barely finished when it was time to start.

Again I managed to secure a carriage to myself, but this time it
proved a very badly coupled one which jolted considerably. Lourdes
was reached in a wretched drizzle, and the benefit conferred on
passengers by having the station _quite_ free from any covering
whatever, was _apparent_ to all. A sudden activity on the part of
the "cochers" to entrap me to their respective (but by no means
necessarily respectable) hotels, as I emerged from the station--
which proved useless--and I was jolting onward to the Hotel des
Pyrenees. When arrived, inspected rooms, ordered fires and dinner,
and whiled away an hour till it was time to repair again to the
station, to meet Mrs. and Miss Blunt and Mr. Sydney, "Red tape"-ism
dominant there, as it is everywhere in France. In fact, "red tape"
is the French official's refuge. Whenever a system is weak or
underhand, they seek protection behind a maze of stupidity and
fuss. I wanted to see the station-master, to obtain permission to
perambulate the platform till the arrival of the train. No porter
would bestir himself to find this great official, but whichever way
I turned one was always ready with his "Ou allez-vous, Monsieur?"
to which the only sensible reply would have been "Pas au ----, comme
vous," but silence and an utter indifference were better still, and
armed with these I ran the gauntlet of the pests, and finding the
"Chef de Gare" in his "bureau," at once received the desired
permission. There was not much time for perambulation, as the train
soon steamed in, though without Mr. Sydney, who was detained for a
day or two longer, and once more, but now a triangular party, we
jolted back to the hotel. The rest of the evening was passed with
dinner, and an endeavour to get warm; the rain and wind still
enjoying themselves without.

[Illustration]

However, with the morn all these miseries vanished, and the sun
shone from a blue sky flecked with a few films of snow. Lourdes
looked very charming under such auspices, and Miss Blunt availed
herself of the balmy air of the morning to wander round the stables
and garden with a speckled pointer and a Pyrenean puppy, between
which and the mountains her attention was divided, though the last
named had certainly the least of it.

Then out we sallied to see the sights, which are more of quality
than quantity. Turning to the right from the hotel door, through
the Place de Marcadal, where the fountain was playing in delightful
imitation of the previous night's rain, we gained the commencement
of the Rue de la Grotte (which bears sharply to the left by the
Hotel de Paris), and followed its muddy ways with more or less
danger owing to absence of footpath, and presence of numerous
carriages. However, having passed the Hotel d'Angleterre and the
end of Rue du Fort (leading to the ancient castle), footpaths came
into view, but the joy of the discovery was much minimized at the
sight of the shops and shopkeepers, as the latter gave us no peace.
It was one ceaseless bother to buy, mostly in French; but one
damsel, confident of success assailed us in whining English,
running up and down before her wares, and seizing different objects
in quick succession, while continuing to praise their beauty and
cheapness. Every shop or stall we passed--and there were a good
many--had an inmate more or less importunate, but as what they had
to say was very similar, it can be all embodied in the following

"CRY OF THE LOURDES SHOPKEEPERS."

This way, if you please, miss; and madame, this way;
Kind sir, pause a moment, and see.
Oh! tell me, I beg, what's your pleasure to-day?
Pray enter--the entrance is free.

Some candles? I've nice ones at half a franc each,
Or thirty centimes, if you will.
Some tins, each with lids fitted tight as a leech,
For you, with blest water to fill.

And look at these beads, only forty centimes,
All carved, and most beautif'ly neat.
I've "charms" that will give you the sweetest of dreams,
And _benitiers_ lovely and sweet.

A cross of pure ivory. Photographs too.
--No good?--You want nothing to-day?--
Alas! what on earth must poor shopkeepers do?
Oh, kindly buy something, I pray!

One candle? You must have _one_ candle to burn
When into the grotto you tread.
Not one? Not a little one? Onward you turn!
Bah! may miseries light on your head!!

As soon as the shops were passed, and even before, women besieged
us with packets of candles, and it was with great difficulty we
made them understand the word No! Then, leaving the Hotels de la
Grotte and Latapie on the right, and the "Panorama" on the opposite
side, we wound down towards the river and the grotto.

To us, it would be hard to conceive anything more pitiable or
repulsive than the scene which met our gaze as we passed at the
base of the church and came in full view of the grotto. An
irregular opening in the dull grey stone going back only a few
feet, with the moisture oozing over it here and there, and the ivy
and weeds adding picturesqueness to what would otherwise be
commonplace; in an elevated niche on the right, a figure of the
Virgin in white robes and blue sash; in front, on the left, a
covered marble cistern, with taps; and innumerable crutches and
candles, were all the unsuperstitious eye could see. But to those
poor wretches gathered round in prayer, influenced by the "light-
headed" dreams of a poor swineherd, the spot was the holiest of
holy ground. The abject reverence of their attitudes, the stand of
flaming and guttering candles, the worship and kissing of the rough
wet stones, the pious drinking of the cistern's water as they came
away--a few pausing to buy some "blest" token of their visit at the
adjacent shop--and the solemn silence that reigned over all, were
the chief features that made the scene one from which we were only
too glad to turn away. Taking the zigzag path among the pleasant
trees and shrubs, on the right, we soon reached the level of the
Gothic church, which we entered from the farther end. Ascending the
steps, the two statues on either side of the porch came in view,
but neither repaid a nearer inspection; St. Bernard, on the left,
looking about as dejected and consumptive as anyone, priest or
layman, well could. The church itself, from a Roman Catholic
standpoint, must be considered very fine, but the adoration of the
Virgin to the almost complete disregard of her subjection to "Our
Saviour" is most apparent. The windows and many of the altars are
beautiful, and so are many of the banners, while the high altar is
a great work of art; but the _unreligious_ tone that this striving
after effect produces, but without which the religion--or so-called
religion--would soon cease to exist, struck us as we entered, and
increased with every step. It was as if to say, "Look at these
lovely things, feast your eyes on them, and let their beauty be the
mainspring to inspire you with faith." There was no appeal to the
true religion of the soul, that springs from the heart in a clear
stream, and which no tinsel banners, no elaborate statues, and no
flaming candles, can quicken or intensify!

Leaving the church by the high road, with the Convent and "Place,"
--with its neat walks and grass plots,--on the left, we proceeded to
the "Panorama," where, our admiration having been tempered by the
payment of a franc each, we spent an enjoyable quarter of an hour.
The painting as a whole--representing Lourdes twenty-five years
ago--is most effective, and the effect is heightened by the
admirable combination with real earth, and grass, and trees. The
grouping of the figures round the grotto, representing the scene at
the eighteenth appearance of the Virgin to Bernadette--who is the
foremost figure kneeling in the grotto--is particularly fine; but
how that huge crowd standing there were content with Bernadette's
assertion that she saw the vision, when none of them saw anything
but the stones, is a practical question that few probably could
answer, and least of all the priests. [Illustration] Returning by
the way we had come, we bore up the Rue du Fort to inspect the old
castle--or all that remained of it--and enjoy the view. After some
two hundred yards of this narrow street, painfully suggestive, in
the vileness of its odours, of Canton's narrower thoroughfares, we
reached the steps leading up on the left, and commenced the ascent.
As it was, we did not find it very difficult work, though if a
rifle had been levelled from every slit in the two-foot walls, it
is probable that before _two_ of the nearly two hundred steps had
been surmounted, we would have been levelled also. Passing between
once impregnable walls (where English soldiers also passed in days
of yore), we crossed the now harmless-looking drawbridge and rang
the bell. A woman opened the door and requested us to enter, a
request which evidently met with the approbation of two diminutive
youngsters, whose faces were dimpled with smiles wherever the fat
would allow. Keeping along the right wall in the direction of the
pig-sties (O! shades of the Black Prince!!!) we were greeted with
the musical tones of the "porkers" and many _sweet_ odours. Having
entered one of the prisons at the base of the tower for a moment,
we next followed the ever-winding steps till fairly giddy, and
reached the top. Thence the view was exceedingly fine. We seemed to
be at the meeting-point of four valleys, and the snow peaks in the
direction of Argeles were free from clouds. The whole of Lourdes
lay like a map beneath; the church with the "Calvary" on the hill
over against it, the river sparkling in the sunlight, the Pic de
Jer with its brown sides, and the winding roads with the green
fields and budding trees, joining to make a pleasant picture.

Descending again to the hotel, we partook of a capital lunch, of
which the "pie de mars," or ringed ousel--a bird of migratory
habits, little known in our isles (except in a few parts of
Scotland), but considered a great delicacy here--formed a part.
After this, Miss Blunt once again devoted herself to the Pyrenean
puppy, till the carriage came round and we took our departure.




CHAPTER IV

ARGELES.

Road v. Rail--Scenes, sublime and ridiculous--Hotel d'Angleterre--
Questions and "The Argeles Shepherd's Reply"--A forbidden path--The
ride to Ges, Serres, Salluz, and Ourous--Argeles church--Route
Thermale--Ges--The tree in the path--"A regular fix"--Serres--"
It's a stupid foal that doesn't know its own mother "--A frothing
stream--A fine view--Pigs in clover--Salluz--Ourous--Contented
villagers--The high road--The bridge on the Pierrefitte road--
Advice to sketchers--"Spring's Bitters and Sweets"--The "witch of
the hills"--Large green lizards--"Jeannette's Lamb"--Round the
Argeles valley--Chateau de Beaucens--Villelongue--Soulom--The old
church--Hotel de la Poste, Pierrefitte--St. Savin--The verger and
the ancient church--Cagots--"The Organ's Tale"--St. Savin's tomb--
The Chateau de Miramont--Jugged izard--Market-day--Sour bread and
the remedy--Arrival of the first parcel.


Although the railway line takes very nearly the same route as the
carriage road, the drive is decidedly preferable, and when it can
be undertaken for ten francs--as in our case--there is little to
choose between the modes of conveyance on the score of cheapness,
especially as a landau can carry a very fair quantity of luggage.
We considered ourselves amply repaid for our choice as we wound
underneath the rocky crags and by the side of the river, anon
ascending the curve of a small hill with the fresh fields below, a
little church or ivied ruin standing out on the mountain-side, and
high above all, the snowy summits so majestic and so intensely
white. There was occasionally a ridiculous side to the picture too,
when we put a flock of sheep in rapid motion in a wrong direction
and the luckless shepherd had to start in hot pursuit--using the
politest of language; or, again, when some natives on tiny donkeys
or skittish mules came by, their faces breaking into a respectful
grin as they wished us "bon jour." Skirting the railway line for a
short distance, we drove into Argeles rather unexpectedly, our ride
having seemed all too short. However, there was our hotel--the
Grand Hotel d'Angleterre (everything is grand now-a-days)--standing
boldly by the road, with the quaint, though poor-looking village
about it, and for another few days that was to be our abode.
[Illustration] This hotel, though possessing less of a reputation
than the Hotel de France, nevertheless commands a finer view on all
sides, and is a pleasanter abode on that account. The afternoon was
still young when we arrived, so as soon as we had stowed our
luggage we sallied out for a walk along the road to Pierrefitte. A
short way from the hotel, an old shepherd was standing in the
middle of the road leaning on his staff, with his flock of sheep
all round him, and the dog lolling idly on the grass. The tall
poplars by the roadside waking into life, the merry stream
meandering at their feet, and the back ground of mountains tipped
with snow, filled up the scene. We accosted the old man with a
good-day, and asked him several questions about the weather and
himself, all of which he answered in a genial way, and which strung
together made up

"THE ARGELES SHEPHERD'S REPLY."

  Good-day, sir! The weather, sir; will it be wet?
  You see, sir, I hardly can say,
  We gen'rally know at the earliest dawn
  What weather we'll have in the day;
  But at night--in these mountains--I couldn't be sure,
  And I'd rather not tell you, sir, wrong.
  And yet, what does a day here or there make to you?
  If it rains, 'twill be fine before long.
  Have I always looked after the sheep, sir? Why, No!
  I've served in the army, sir, sure.
  Let me see--ah!--it's now thirty summers ago
  Since those hardships we had to endure.
  Ay, I fought with your soldiers 'mid bleak Russia's snow,
  Half numb'd in the trenches I worked,
  And suffered what few of you gents, sir, would know,
  But somehow, we none of us shirked.
  Was I wounded, sir? No, sir! thank Goodness for that,
  Though I've seen some stiff fighting, 'tis true.
  In Africa 'twasn't all sunshine and play,
  And in Austria we'd plenty to do.
  Do I like being a shepherd, sir, roaming the hills,
  Just earning enough to buy bread?
  Well, I wouldn't have cared all my days, for the ills
  And the life that as soldier I led.
  No, sir! no! though 'twas well enough then, Peace, you see,
  Is the best when one's hair's turning grey!
  Will I drink your good health, sir? Ay, proud I shall be,
  And, thanking you kindly--Good-day!!!

Strolling on, we soon reached the bridge over the River Gave
d'Azun, and leaving the old structure "whose glory has departed" on
the right, we crossed over and continued along the road for a short
distance, till we noticed a lane leading off to the left, which we
followed. This in time bore further round in the same direction and
suddenly ended at the entrance to a field. However, keeping
straight on, we came in view of the river's bank and to this we
kept, recrossing by the railway bridge below, and then back by the
fields home, completing a round none the less pleasant because a
captious critic might have called it trespassing.

As lovely a ride or walk as can well be imagined, even by an
imagination as fertile as this lovely valley, passes by way of the
four villages of Ges, Serres, Salluz, and Ourous. Although the
weather was rather unsettled, we started one morning about 9.15,
and following the road towards Lourdes for about two hundred yards,
took the sharp turn to the left (with the telegraph wires) up into
the town. Gaining the church, we bore along to the right into the
open "Place," at the left corner of which the Route Thermale to
Eaux Bonnes and Eaux Chaudes begins. For about half a mile this was
our road also, but after that distance, the Ges route branched off
to the right, and the views of Argeles, and the rest of the valley
from it, as we wound upwards, were particularly lovely. The horses
were very fresh, having only lately been brought from the
mountains, after a winter of idleness, and they walked at a fast
pace fretting at any stoppage whatever, which they did not
endeavour to disguise, any more than their inclination to shy at
anything they possibly could. As far as Ges the way is easy to
follow, but it is wise to inquire frequently afterwards, as so many
equally important (this importance is decidedly on the negative
side) looking paths branch off in every direction. The good people
we saw in Ges, a village of thatched cottages looking the worse for
rain, said we should find the "road vile," but this did not daunt
us, and with a "bon jour" we passed on. We had not gone very far,
however, when to our dismay we saw a huge tree right across the
road. Our position was an awkward one. The road was rather narrow
and without any protection; there was only the steep hillside
above, and the steep hillside below. To go up was quite
impracticable, to go down was destruction! My horse approached the
impediment very quietly, and allowed me to break off several of the
worst branches, and then scramble by. Miss Blunt's horse came close
up to it as though intending to pass quietly, but, instead, wheeled
round on the extreme edge of the path in anything but a pleasant
fashion, either for the rider or the observer. [Illustration]
Dismounting and tying my steed to one of the branches on the near
side of the road, I held back as many of the others as possible,
and the horse came up quietly again, but repeated the disagreeable
business, still more dangerously. Having broken off several more,
and again pulled back the others, the skittish animal consented to
pass. But in passing he bent down a very pliant bough, which, when
released, flew back and hit my peaceful steed sharply on the legs.
For a few seconds his efforts to get free were--to put it mildly--
unpleasantly severe, especially as he became with each effort more
entangled in the tree. When the reins were at length unknotted, he
quieted a little, and after being led a few yards, submitted to be
mounted very peaceably, and we descended, with the fresh leaves
above and below us, into Serres. Here we had occasion to remark
that "It's a stupid foal that doesn't know its own mother," as one
pretty little thing would persist in following our steeds, until a
sturdy "paysanne" turned it back. The correct route all this time
was the upper one (or that to the left), and we now came to a very
lovely bit, where two swift frothing streams dashed down beneath
the trees, near a small saw-mill. A fine view up the valley behind
us, to the snow peaks towering over the ruddy hill-tops, was
enjoyed, as we continued along the ascending and uneven path. In
the fields above, some shepherds were driving a flock of sheep, and
a woman, reposing under a huge blue gingham, was watching the
vigorous onslaught of several pigs in a small clover patch. A few
villagers, in their Sunday best, stood by the wayside discussing
some topic with languid interest, which they dropped, to wish us
"bon jour" and tell us the road. More lovely effects of light and
shade over the hills towards Pierrefitte, with filmy clouds
shrouding the tallest summits, and here and there a glimpse of the
blue sky, and we passed into the straggling hamlet of Salluz, after
which the path branched up--still to the left--through the trees.
Winding down again, we came to Ourous, to which apparently the
inhabitants from all the other villages had come, dressed in their
Sunday best, to mass. "Young men and maidens, old men and
children," women tottering with extreme age, were all assembled
round about the old church, looking contented and happy, smiling,
and wishing us a "bon jour" as we rode in a circular direction
through the village, till we reached a spot where the road forks,
the one to the right leading to Argeles, the one to the left to
Lourdes. The former looked so stony that we chose the other, and
had not gone very far before a smooth and broader path to the right
(from which a grand view of the whole valley opened before us)
brought us down to a few houses, between which we passed, and
reached the high-road. A good trot along this, by the side of the
railway line, and we were back at the hotel, convinced that the
badness of the road and all drawbacks were amply--and more than
amply--outweighed by the succession of beautiful scenery.

Two walks, one ending in rather a scramble, branch off immediately
below the bridge, on the Pierrefitte road. The one we took, at a
respectable hour of the morning, which ascends the left side of the
mound, is the prettier by far, as it discloses lovely glimpses at
every turn. We followed it till it branched off in two directions
(the one to the left being the real continuation), but at this
point we turned off into a field, deep in grass and studded with
flowers, where some comfortable-looking boulders invited us to
rest. Miss Blunt,--whose soul thrills with delight at the vastness
and beauty of nature,--never allowed opportunities of committing
the choicest bits to canvas or paper, to escape her; and, some
picturesque display having caught her eye, directly she had located
herself on an accommodating boulder, she was at work. Herrick's
good advice, "Gather ye rosebuds while ye may--Old Time is still a-
flying," might be adapted, she thinks, to sketchers in mountainous
regions, and she speaks from bitter experience when she suggests:

"Paint in your snow-peaks while you may,
If clouds are quickly flying,
For those heights now in bright display
May soon in mist be lying."

The beauty of the scene was without alloy, the colouring splendid,
and up the road above us, beyond which rose the hill, a shepherd
was leading his flock of sheep, now and then clapping his hands or
shouting to a straggler, but as a rule walking quietly on, the
whole flock following in a continuous line. Not wishing to be idle,
I took out my pencil to indulge in a poetic eulogy. How far I
succeeded may be judged from the following lines, which might be
called

"SPRING'S BITTERS AND SWEETS."

Here on a moss-grown boulder sitting,
Watching the graceful swallows flitting,
Hearing the cuckoo's note.
Sheep on the hills around me feeding,
While in their piteous accents pleading,
The lambkins' bleatings float.
--Oh, dear! a fly gone down my throat.

Spring's gentle influence all things feeling,
New life o'er hill and valley stealing:
Buttercups, daisies fair,
Studding the meadow, sweetly smiling,
Bees with their hum the hours beguiling,
Breezes so soft and rare.
--Oh, what a fearful wasp was there!

Grand is the view from this grey boulder,
Each high snow-peak, each rocky shoulder:
Charming, yet wild, the sight.
Cherry-trees, with white blossom laden,
And 'neath their shade a peasant maiden,
Comely her costume bright.
--Oh, how these impish ants do bite!

Onward the winding river's flowing,
Its spray-splashed stones in sunshine glowing,
The peaceful oxen by.
From the tall trees the magpies' warning,
As on their nests intent, our presence scorning,
From branch to branch they fly.
--Oh! there's an insect in my eye.
I've done: such pests one really can't defy.

Miss Blunt couldn't defy them either, so, as it was getting near
luncheon-time besides, we retraced our steps, but had not gone very
far before we suffered a severe disappointment. Some fifty yards
below us in the path stood a seeming counterpart of "Madge
Wildfire"; a wild, weird, wizened looking creature, whom we
immediately recognised as a "witch of the hills." Her hair unkempt,
her bodice hanging in tatters from her shoulders, her patched and
threadbare petticoat barely fastened round what should have been
her waist (and a _waste_ it was) by a hook and eye held by a few
threads--even such as this, up the path she came. But what a
miserable failure she was! When she came close to us, instead of
pouring out a torrent of mad words, telling of her woes and wrongs,
or at any rate breaking into a disgusting whine such as

  "Oh, gentles, I am mad and old,
  My dress is worn and thin;
  Oh, give me one small piece of gold!
  To clothe my wretched skin;"

she didn't even offer to tell our fortunes, but passed timidly by.
It was enough to have disappointed a saint! and we were only
restored to a pleasant frame of mind by finding Mr. Sydney at the
hotel on our return.

[Illustration]

In the afternoon we took the other path--previously mentioned as
branching off below the bridge over the Gave d'Azun,--which leading
sharply to the right, passes beside the river for a short distance,
and then leads among the fields, finally--like others in Argeles--
losing itself there. Just as the poplars which run with it ceased,
we had a lovely view up a dip between two fertile hills, to the
snow-peaks near Bareges; a narrow path skirts the side of the hill,
on the right, in the direction of the morning's sketching ground,
but this we did not take, making, instead, for the hill standing
immediately above the river. Up this a certain distance we
clambered--scaring a few large green lizards that were sunning
themselves on the stones,--by a sheep track we managed to discover,
till we could look down on a mass of tangled brushwood by the
riverside. Scrambling down to this through the wild vines and
briars, we succeeded, after many fruitless attempts, in gaining the
water's edge. There was no place to cross and the current was far
too swift to attempt jumping, so we had to turn back. While
deliberating on the right path, a little girl, looking very
wretched, with blurred face and torn clothes, came round a corner,
and asked us if we had seen a lamb anywhere. We were sorry we
hadn't, very sorry indeed; all we could do was to endeavour to
recollect a rhyme and adapt it to her case, that we learnt in the
nursery when we were something under fifteen, and, although it
didn't seem to assuage her grief much--probably because she didn't
understand a word of English--we think it ought to be quoted in
case it should be useful to others.

JEANNETTE'S LAMB.

Jeannette had a naughty lamb,
That looked like dirty snow;
And wherever Jeannette went
That lamb would never go.

It wandered from her care one day,
(Oh, stupid little fool!)
It made her cry her heart away
While searching brake and pool.

And Jeannette tore her dress to rags,
And scratched her hands and face;
But of her dirty little lamb
She couldn't find a trace.

The lamb fell in the river deep,
But Jeannette never knew.
Though Satan finds some mischief still,
For little lambs to do.

However, she listened very submissively till we had finished, and
then wandered off again still searching for her lamb, while we
retraced our steps.

There is a drive round the Argeles valley, which on a fine day is
simply splendid, and ought certainly not to be missed. At ten a.m.
a landau with two good horses was at the door, and away we went
towards Argeles station, across the line, over a new piece of road,
and then across a rather shaky, but wholly quaint, wooden bridge
(under which flows the Gave de Pau) to the base of the hills. As we
continued along this road in the direction of Pierrefitte, the
views of the mountains on the Argeles side were especially fine.
The Pic d'Arrens (7435 ft.) and the Col de Tortes (5903 ft.), with
the wild Pic de Gabizos (8808 ft.) with its toothed summits, behind
it--in the direction of Eaux Bonnes: over Pierrefitte the Pic de
Soulom (5798 ft.), the Pic de Viscos (7025 ft.), and far up the
Cauterets valley the Cabaliros (7655 ft.), the Pic de Labassa (9781
ft.), and the Pyramide de Peyrelance (8800 ft. about). An
especially interesting part arrives, as the road approaches the
wonderful old ruin of the Chateau de Beaucens (with "oubliettes"
towers, a "donjon" of the 14th century, and west walls of the 16th
ditto), which stands on the left, not far from the village of the
same name. Crossing the river again, we just managed to pass over
some newly-laid road, to the village of Villelongue--above which,
on the left, towers the imposing Pic de Villelongue--and soon after
found ourselves beside the river again at the foot of the Pic de
Soulom, where it is very lovely, and crossing another bridge,
reached Soulom itself. It seemed to us an old and somewhat dirty
town--not to say filthy--but the church is worthy of a visit. It
was formerly fortified, and the construction of the belfry--if such
it can be called--is curious. The inscription over the door, "This
is the house of God and the gate of heaven," written in Latin,
seems somewhat grotesque for such a building, although the dome is
painted to represent the sky in all the "intensity" of a starlight
night. A few yards along the road and we stood on the bridge over
the "Gave de Cauterets," at the other side of which is Pierrefitte
--and from which point the scenery is especially grand. Passing the
Hotel de la Poste (recommended) on the left, and the way to the
station on the right, we bore up the hill in the former direction,
towards St. Savin.

This old place--in fact the oldest village in the valley--is an
easy walk from Argeles, and should certainly not be excluded from a
visit. Having passed the dismantled Chateau de Despourrins and the
statue at the roadside erected in the poet's (Despourrins') honour,
we had a grand glimpse of the valley below; and, leaving behind the
Chapelle de Pietad (16th century), which stands on a point above
the road, we entered the village. The street leading to the ancient
Roman Church is ancient too, reminding one, in the curious
construction of the houses, of Chester, the style of supporting the
upper part on wooden beams, reaching over the road, and leaving a
passage beneath, being very similar. The church has been restored
and is in capital preservation. As there were so many objects of
interest, chiefly connected with the great St. Savin himself, we
sent for the verger, sexton, bellringer, parish beadle, or whatever
the "goitreux" individual called himself, and paid great attention
to all he had to say. Although a good deal was quite unintelligible,
the following are some of the most interesting facts. Entering
at the small side door, immediately within stands a curious
and very old benitier (font), with two curious individuals
carved in the stone supporting the basin. These are supposed to
represent two "Cagots," a despised race for whom the font itself
was constructed. Very few people know anything about their origin,
but they were greatly detested by the inhabitants of the country,
and not even allowed to worship in the same church, or use the same
"holy water" as the rest. They still exist about Gavarnie and a few
other spots, and we hope to learn more of them. The old battered
organ next presents itself to the view, with the long flight of
steps leading up to it, but as it wished to tell its own story,
without further description behold

"THE ORGAN'S TALE."

  Good people who gaze at my ruinous state,
  Don't lift up your noses and sneer:
  I've a pitiful story I wish to relate,
  And, I pray you, believe me sincere.

  I was young, I was "sweet," in the years that are gone,
  The breath through my proud bosom rolled,
  And I loved to peal forth as the service went on,
  O'er the heads of the worshipping fold.

  How time speeds along! Three whole centuries--yes!--
  Have passed since the day of my birth;
  And, good people, I thought myself then, you may guess,
  The loveliest organ on earth.

  Such pipes and such stops! and a swell--such a swell!!!
  My music rang under the dome;
  And the way that I held the old folks 'neath my spell
  You should know; but alas! they've gone "home."

  Then my varnish was bright, and my panels were gay
  With devices both script'ral and quaint;
  I frightened the _sinner_ with hair turning grey,
  But charmed into rapture the _saint_.

  Those faces once painted so brightly would smile,
  And put out their tongues at my voice;
  As the pedals were played, they would wag all the while,
  And the children below would rejoice.

  Now is it not sad to have once been so grand,
  And now to be shattered and old?
  To look but a ruin up here, where I stand
  Decidedly out in the cold?

  Each "pipe is put out," and my "stops" are no more,
  I belong to a "period" remote;
  And as to the tongues that wagged freely of yore,
  They have long disappeared down the throat.

  My pedals are broken or gone quite awry,
  My "keys"--you may "note"--are now dust;
  No longer a "swell"--not as faint as a sigh--
  While my bellows, good people, are "bust."

  I am twisted and worn, in a ruinous state,
  But prythee, good people, don't sneer!
  My joys and my sorrows I've tried to relate,
  And in judging me don't be severe!!!

Leaving the organ, and passing behind the "high altar," we beheld
the tomb of the redoubtable saint, who is supposed to have been
shut up there at the end of the 10th century, though the gilt
ornament (?) above is some four centuries younger. The set of old
paintings to the right and left represent scenes in the good man's
life, who, if he had only changed the _i_ in his name to _o_--and
the king would have agreed readily--by the perpetual allusion to
_Savon_, would perhaps have done much for the natives generally.
The robing-room, wherein the head of the revered man is kept in a
casket, and the "Salle du Chapitre," with quaint carvings of the
12th century, beyond, are other places of interest.

The "Chateau de Miramont," which adjoins, is now used as a convent
(or college), and visitors are not permitted to inspect it. We
bought a lithographed print of the church and its environs for half
a franc, from our round-backed guide, besides depositing a
"douceur" in his horny palm, and consequently parted with him on
the best of terms. The road for some distance being rather steep,
we preferred to walk and let the carriage follow, but when nearing
the junction with the Pierrefitte road, we mounted again and bowled
along at a smart pace over the well-known bridge to the hotel.

There was nothing striking about our hotel life, although we found
it pleasant, being a "parti carre." We were generally the sole
partakers of the table-d'hote, at which the food was excellent, the
jugged chamois (izard) being especially good. Light, however, was
at a premium. It may have been all out of compliment, to bear
testimony to our being "shining lights" ourselves; still, for all
that, we should have been glad to forego the politeness, and
receive, instead, a reinforcement of lamps.

Argeles itself is a peculiar old place; though devoid of much
interest, except on market-days. The curious houses and towers, the
street watercourses (as at Bagneres de Bigorre), the church, and
the strange chapel-like building now used as a diocesan college,
are all that is noteworthy even, excepting the "State schools,"
built three years ago.

On a Tuesday, when the market is in full swing, the square in front
of the post-office looks bright and cheerful, and vegetables
flourish. We took a very pleasant walk after passing through the
stalls, and down past the Hotel de France. The route we followed
leads to the right, close by the new State schools, among some poor
cottages, where it turns sharply in the opposite direction, and
runs down beside some fine old chestnut trees to the river.
Continuing, the track leads up a fine glen, with views of the snow-
peaks towards Eaux Bonnes, which well repaid our walk.

Returning again by the town, we wandered about through the narrow
streets, taking a farewell survey before leaving for Cauterets,
whither we were next intent.

There is another episode connected with Argeles, that will live in
our memories, and it is one that future travellers, methinks, may
have reason to appreciate, if not to endorse.

Everybody learns from unhappy experience how sour the bread is
throughout the Pyrenees, only excepting two or three resorts, and
as we were aware of the fact before leaving Pau, we arranged with
Monsieur Kern, of the Austrian Bakery, Rue de la Prefecture, to
send us a certain amount of bread every day. The first night at
Argeles was spent without it, but on the evening of the following
day a packet was brought into the drawing-room, where we were
assembled, and at the magical word "bread" every eye brightened,
and every face relaxed into a smile. Let no one cavil. This was one
of the episodes that link Argeles to us with a pleasant charm.




CHAPTER V.

CAUTERETS.

Hotel de la Poste, Pierrefitte--The Gorge--Its majestic beauty--The
resemblance to the Llanberis Pass--Mrs. Blunt becomes poetical--Zinc
mines--Le Pont de Mediabat--Entering the town--The Rue Richelieu and
Hotel du Parc--Winter's seal upon them still--Thermes des
Oeufs--Thermes de Cesar--The Casino and Esplanade des Oeufs--A good
dinner and the menu--The start for the Col de Riou--The Grange de la
Reine Hortense--The pines--Miss Blunt's "exhortation to the first
snow"--The dogs and their gambols--Defeated, but not discouraged--To
the Cerizey Cascade--The baths of La Raillere, Petit St. Sauveur, and
Le Pre--Cascade du Lutour--The Marcadau gorge--Scenery--Pic de
Gaube--At the Cerizey Cascade--The Pont d'Espagne and Lac de
Gaube--Pont de Benques--Lutour Valley--Various excursions up same--The
"Pare"--Allees de Gambasque--The Peguere--The "Pagoda" Villa--Promenade
du Mamelon Vert--The road's up again--Blows and blasts--The bishop's
arrival--Enthusiasm, pomposity, and benedictions--The pilgrims at
large--They start on an excursion--The market and Hotel de Ville--The
grocer's opinion--Pyrenean dogs and their treatment--The
dog-fancier--Smiles and temper--Bargaining displaced--No dog after all!


A Landau with four horses was ready after lunch, to transport us and
our baggage to Cauterets; but having enjoyed Argeles very much, we were
none of us particularly glad at the prospect of the change. The road as
far as Pierrefitte, lovely as it is at this season of freshness,
discloses no other views than those previously described, but when we
turned sharply to the right, after passing the Hotel de la Poste, and
began the ascent towards Cauterets, then our eyes had indeed a rich
treat. It would require the most dismal of dismal days, with sluicing
rain and clouds low down on every beautiful crag and snow-tipped
summit, to make anybody born with a soul above his dinner, complain of
the grandeur of the gorge, or impugn the unceasing variety of dashing
waterfalls, foaming river, freshly-opened leaves, white heather, and
bright, flower-decked fields.

The same wild majesty as the Llanberis Pass presents, strikes one here:
the enormous crags in threatening attitude far up the heights, the
chasms and fissures brightened by a patch of young grass or a small
tree, and, nearer the road, the scattered boulders luxuriantly covered
with moss and fern, belong to both alike; and, while the bushes of
snowy heather, the constant splash of the cascades falling over the
rocks in feathery spray, and in the distance the hoary-headed monarchs
of the range reaching up towards the sky, make this different from the
familiar Welsh scene, it is only a difference that greatly intensifies
the beauty and the charm of this Cauterets gorge.

Even Mrs. Blunt, who as a rule prefers the matter-of-fact to the
poetical, was lifted out of herself, for she suddenly clutched me by
the arm, and pointing in the distance, murmured something about
"summits proudly lifting up to the sky," and being quite unused to that
kind of thing, it took me some time to recover from the shock.

A little over three miles from Pierrefitte,--where a glimpse at the
zinc mines and the wire tram in connection with them can be
obtained--the road passes over the bridge of Mediabat, and some yards
beyond becomes identical with the old route, which until then lay below
us. The new portion (made in 1874) only extends for about two miles,
as it does not commence till after the zigzag rise from Pierrefitte
leads into the gorge, but the engineering of the whole has been
admirably carried out, and the ascent of nearly 1,700 feet in the six
miles does not tell severely on the horses. Now in an almost straight
line, now by zigzags, we gradually neared the town, the gorge widening
at the same time, though the peaks, some covered with trees, some
snow-covered, seemed to bar the way completely at no very great
distance.

We were quite close before we could really be said to have seen the
town, and ere we could form any opinion of it we drove up the Rue
Richelieu and found ourselves at the Hotel du Parc. Monsieur
Villeneuve, the jovial and experienced host, and his pleasant spouse,
came out to welcome us, and although the hotel had only been open four
days, made us as comfortable as they could.

[Illustration: CAUTERETS.]

Cauterets (3,254 feet) was only just waking into life, only two or
three hotels, one or two hair-dressers, one confectioner's, one
tobacconist's, and one or two grocers' shops were open; while of the
bathing establishments, the "Thermes des Oeufs," the largest, and the
Thermes de Cesar, were the only ones showing signs of renewed life.
The Esplanade des Oeufs, [Footnote: "Oeufs" because of the water's
scent resembling "rotten eggs."] a large tree-planted space in front of
the principal "thermes" (just mentioned)--which serves as casino,
concert-hall, and theatre as well--seemed utterly deserted; whereas in
summer, with the band playing, the trees in full leaf, the booths
opened, and the crowds of visitors, the scene must be the gayest of
the gay. We had just time to notice so much, on the afternoon of our
arrival, before the sun set behind the huge mountains which surround
this charming spot and the hour of dinner arrived. This dinner was so
excellent, so well cooked and served, that, although we despise with a
deep-rooted scorn the wretched class of individuals who make their
dinner their main object in life, we nevertheless consider that we are
only paying a merited tribute to the _chef_ in saying that the
cooking was always of a high standard, and quoting as a specimen the
evening's _menu_ (May 1):

SOUP.
Gravy.

FISH.
Salmon, with sliced potatoes and melted butter.

MADE DISHES.
Hashed Veal. Sauce Piquante.
Sweetbreads and green peas.

ROAST.
Chicken.

VEGETABLES.
Asparagus. Potatoes (new).

PUDDING.
Sago.

ICE, &c.
Vanilla cream.
Cheese, Jelly, and Biscuits.

When we woke the following morning, the sun shining from a cloudless
sky proclaimed an "excursion morning." Accordingly, we sent for a
guide, to inquire if a visit to the Lac de Gaube was practicable. The
guide arrived, and disappointment ensued. It was possible to go if we
didn't mind a few miles of snow, two feet deep and upwards. But we did
mind very strongly, and said so. Then the burly native spoke again, and
said that the Col de Riou was an easy trip, that we could take horses
to within a short distance of the summit, and that when we got there
the splendid view would include St. Sauveur, Argeles, Bareges,
Gavarnie, &c. &c. And we answered the burly native in his sister tongue
(_patois_ was his mother tongue), or as near to it as we could,
and said, "Have three horses ready by half-past ten at this hotel, and
we will start." Then, delighted, he smiled and bowed, and disappeared
down the street.

At eleven o'clock the cavalcade started, and a noble cavalcade it was:
Miss Blunt on a strong dark bay pony, Mr. Sydney on a similar-coloured
horse, and myself on a grey, formed the van; then came our burly friend
(by name Pont Dominique), and another guide (Berret), carrying the
lunch; and the rear was brought up by a small brindled bull-dog, and a
smaller specimen of unknown breed, which was nevertheless a capital
harmony in orange and white. In this order we left the Rue Richelieu
and ascended the Rue d'Etigny, passing under several wreaths and
crowns, with which the streets were decorated. We had previously
noticed these grand preparations on our arrival, and though sensible of
the good feeling that apparently prompted these attentions, we thought
they were somewhat superfluous. But that is (as they were) by the way.
Having soon reached the last of the houses, we gained the Rue du Pauze
Vieux, and turning sharply to the right, ascended to the two
establishments known respectively as the Pauze Vieux and Pauze Nouveau.
And here a paradox--pause, view, and be convinced! The Pauze Vieux is
the Pauze Nouveau and the Pauze Nouveau is the Pauze Vieux. Should any
well-educated citizen of any country under the sun (or daughter) be
disposed to doubt, let him examine the buildings for himself, and he
must agree.

Half-an-hour after starting we reached the cottage known as the "Grange
de la Reine Hortense," the view from which is excessively fine. Looking
down towards the town, the mighty Cabaliros (7655 ft.), forming a
semicircle, stood above on the right; to the left of this semicircle
reared up the Monne (8938 ft.), the highest mountain in the vicinity,
from which other peaks make another similar formation, ending with La
Brune, beside which, but more to the left and immediately over the
town, rises the Peguere, covered with irregularly-heaped crags, and
pines. The town itself looked very neat and compact: the Mamelon Vert
(a small hill to the right) and the chief thorough-fares being easily
distinguished. Far up the Lutour valley, to the extreme left, the Pic
de Labassa, or de la Sebe (9781 ft.), and the Pyramide de Peyrelance
(8800 ft.), completed the chief points of the scene in that direction;
but far away in the opposite one we could easily see the Argeles valley
and the Gothic church of Lourdes. Behind us, seemingly facing the
Cabaliros, were the Col de Riou (6375 ft.), our would-be destination,
and the Pic de Viscos. Winding up the hillside, and passing banks blue
with the large and small gentian, we entered the pines, which made a
pleasant change. As at the Col d'Aspin, [Footnote: Vide Bigorre, p.
42.] the rising sap filled the air with its refreshing odour, and the
occasional glimpses of blue sky, mountain, and valley, through the
gently waving branches, were very charming.

[Illustration: ASCENT OF COL DE RIOU]

We had not proceeded very far through the trees when we reached a
break, where one of the party felt that at least something had been
gained. There, partly on the track, partly on the loose stones above
it, lay a bank of snow, and so delighted was Miss Blunt at having
attained the (present) snow-line--say about 4600 feet above sea
level--that her feelings were not to be in any way damped or
suppressed, as they burst forth in an

"EXHORTATION TO THE FIRST SNOW."

  Emblem of Purity,
  Chilly as Charity,
Oh, what a joy your deep whiteness to view!
  Something is gain'd at last,
  But you are melting fast,
Why does the cruel sun put you to stew?

  Tell me, O long-lain snow,
  What of the vale below?
What do you think about people and things?
  Do you love forest-trees?
  Or love you more the breeze?
Tell me what bird you think most sweetly sings?

  What? You've no heart at all?
  Cannot help where you fall,
Caring not if you swell to a huge size:
  Minding not how you rush,
  What you break, whom you crush?
Surely such feelings you ought to disguise.

  Ah, well! we won't discuss,
  Useless to make a fuss;
For, after all, I am glad that we met.
  Emblem of Purity,
  Chilly as Charity--
But I won't roll in you. No! you're too wet!

The two dogs were amusing in their absurdity. They were perpetually
endeavouring to detach stones from the side of the pathway, so as to
have the pleasure of pursuing them down the steep. At times, when the
hill was thickly strewn with leaves or particularly steep, they
completely disappeared, though violent pulsations among the scattered
branches and the aforesaid leaves told us they were not lost, but only
temporarily buried.

When we had barely mounted another 400 feet, we came upon regular banks
of snow, right over the path. This was quite unexpected, and we had to
decide whether to leave the horses and tramp through the snow, or to
return. We chose the latter--although the Col de Riou stood out
seemingly very practicable of ascent--and, returning on foot, the
horses and guides following, with the dogs here, there, and everywhere,
we reached the "Grange de la Reine Hortense" and proceeded to lunch.
After giving a very good account of the _pate_ sandwiches, and not
forgetting the guides and the dogs, we made our way slowly back,
defeated perhaps, but certainly not discouraged.

Although neither the Lac de Gaube nor the Pont d'Espagne were
attainable, the Cerizey Fall, which is about one third of the distance
to the lake along the same route, was kind enough to put itself at our
disposal. Not wishing to appear ungrateful, we availed ourselves of a
fine afternoon to order round the horses and our two guides, and
started about two o'clock. For some time we followed the road known as
the Rue de la Raillere, which leads to the baths of the same name from
the Place St. Martin; crossing the river by a very unpretentious
bridge, not far from the town. Leaving La Raillere behind, and passing
in turn the drinking establishment of Mauhourat--near which the Gaves
of Lutour and Marcadau form the Gave of Cauterets--and the baths of
Petit St. Sauveur and Le Pre, and gaining as we mounted a good view of
the "Cascade de Lutour" on the left, we entered the Marcadau valley, or
(more properly) gorge. The scenery, similar somewhat to that at the
entrance to the Cauterets gorge from Pierrefitte, is nevertheless
wilder and more severe. The occasional bright fields and frequent
mountain streams, with their merry music, disappear; but the lofty
heights, the gloomy firs, the mighty crags and boulders, and the
snow-peaks beyond, remain. After a great amount of very rough and steep
ascending--the Pic de Gaube (7644 ft.) the while standing conspicuously
before us--we reached the small hut that is intended as a shelter, near
the fall. Dismounting and taking the narrow path to the right over the
stones, immediately above the hut, we obtained a capital view of this
noisy cascade. Other views were obtained by us from above, by
clambering over the stones and boulders at the side of the torrent; but
this is the best of all. From the hut (mentioned above) one hour's good
walking, over anything but a pleasant track, brings one to the Pont
d'Espagne, and it requires another forty minutes to reach the Lac de
Gaube.

[Footnote: The lake is full of excellent salmon trout, and there is a
small inn on its shores, where visitors can stop the night in summer.
The Vignemale, from whose summit the view is wonderfully vast, rears up
above the lake.]

As horses can be taken for the whole distance when the road is free
from snow, our feelings at not being able to proceed can be better
imagined than described! By Mauhourat, whither we presently returned,
the Pont de Benques crosses the Marcadau, and the track to the left
leads up the valley of the Gave de Lutour. We did not pursue it very
far, as the workmen were busy repairing it, and it is also very rough
and steep. Several favourite excursions, however, are reached by it,
among which may be mentioned the Cascade de "Pisse-Arros" (forty
minutes from Cauterets), the "Fruitiere" (two hours from Cauterets),
the Lac d'Estom, 5847 ft. (three hours from Cauterets), the Ravin
d'Araille (three hours forty-five minutes), the Lake of Estom Soubiran,
7632 ft. (four hours thirty minutes), the Lake of Estibaoute, 7744 ft.
(four hours forty five minutes), and the Col d'Estom Soubiran (six
hours thirty minutes).

[Illustration: LAC DE GAUBE.]

Instead of again crossing the bridge below La Raillere, we kept to the
left, along what may have been _once_ a Roman road, but which was
_now_ at any rate a track both unpleasant and dangerous.

For some distance, large boulders, soil, and smaller stones overhung
it, and seemed as though the least rain or slightest push would bring
them down. Gradually this unpleasantness ceased, and as the road
widened we passed a few villas and entered the "Parc," which, according
to the natives, is part and parcel of the Esplanade des Oeufs, the
great summer resort in front of the Casino, from the back of which a
pleasant path of very gentle gradient ascends for about a mile to the
"Allees de Cambasque," up the flank of the Peguere; and to the Cabanes
(huts) de Cambasque beyond.

Although there is but little level road for enjoying a ride, we
nevertheless managed to pass a short time very pleasantly on horseback.
Leaving the Esplanade des Oeufs on the left, we took the road passing
between the back of the Hotel d'Angleterre and a curious chalet, built
with a pagoda beside it, and little bridges in communication. Following
this road, which is known as the Promenade du Mamelon Vert, [Footnote:
The Mamelon Vert is a green hill near the entrance to the town.] and in
turn passing the "Cafe du Mamelon Vert"--near which the track to the
Cabaliros branches off--and the commencement of the path to Catarabe,
we bore down to the right at the back of the Mamelon, and crossed the
Gave by a rickety wooden bridge--shortly to be superseded by one of
stone--into the Pierrefitte road. Down this, through the fine gorge
within sight of the mines, and then back to the hotel, constituted the
remainder of the ride.

Our stay at Cauterets was not without excitement, though certainly that
excitement was not of a pleasant kind. We soon discovered that the
decorating of the streets was for the benefit of the "Confirmation
Procession," for which the Bishop was coming from Tarbes. The Rue
Richelieu was "up" all along one side for the laying of gas-pipes, and,
by way of diversion, every now and then--usually when we were at
dinner, or wanting to look out of the window--a penny squeaking trumpet
would sound, then a lad would rush about and close all the shutters,
leaving the rooms in darkness and the inmates in suspense, till it
ended in a series of loud reports, accompanied by the distribution of
various specimens of granite in all directions. The authorities stopped
this nice performance when the Bishop was expected, as the mere chance
of "blasting" a Bishop would have been too painful for the Catholic
workmen's feelings, especially as they hoped for a benediction! As soon
as word arrived of the approach of "Monseigneur's" carriage, the cure
and chief dignitaries of the town, accompanied by a brass band, a
detachment of firemen, and a small regiment of women--decked in hoods
of blue or red or white--passed down the muddy street, bearing banners,
and a gilded canopy with white plumes. In a few moments they returned,
the band playing, the banners waving, the abbes and choir singing, and
in the centre of the throng, with two cures in front of him under the
canopy, came the new Bishop of Tarbes, resplendent in violet watered
silk, trimmed with beautiful lace, gloves of the same hue, with ring on
the outside of the right hand, which he perpetually kissed to the
admiring spectators. Miss Blunt, who was for once able to look out of
the window in safety, had a special one all to herself, and of course
she didn't mind any amount of explosions after that!

Then we had other excitements, in the shape of wretched bands of
pilgrims, who, having a spare day, came up from Lourdes to see the
mountains. They invaded our salon, drank beer at eight o'clock in the
morning, and looked on the whole--in spite of their rosettes of black,
red, and yellow--as disreputable a lot of individuals as ever turned
religion into farce. Whether it was quite worth while suffering their
presence for the fun of seeing them mount, when starting for their
excursion, is open to question, but that it was a unique and comic
sight we were all agreed. The hotel garden, filled with guides, horses,
donkeys, and pilgrims; the delicate exhibition of ankles and feet
--such feet; the chairs to help the rotund damsels; the swarm of
natives round one especially fat woman, who got down after all; the
beaming face of the host, and the gloomy looks of a very fat man, just
the size for a small pilgrim tea party; not omitting the priest, whose
flowing robe nearly hid his _better half_ (viz. the donkey), made
a scene worthy of reproduction in the pages of 'Punch.'

Although we strolled about a good deal, we found but little of interest
in the town itself; perhaps the most fascinating spot was the
Patisserie Suisse, in the Rue Cesar, just below the baths of the same
name. The Hotel de Ville is a fine building, and in summer perhaps, the
market, which stands in a street to the left of it, may present an
animated spectacle; but at this time it had the appearance of a large
monkey cage, with good strong iron railings in front, a few cabbages
and onions, and a small group of ancient and much-wizened native
specimens inside.

We enjoyed our stay, however, in the midst of all the wild scenery
immensely, and think that but few people, if they came during the month
of June, would be prepared to differ from us. There are always some of
course, and before coming we had the pleasure of meeting two of them,
in the shape of a retired _grocer_ (or something of that kind in
the wholesale line) and his wife. They both declared that "Cauterets
was a vile 'ole, with 'igh streets and showy 'ouses, and that a
sensible 'uman being wouldn't stay there ha _h_our;" but it must
be mentioned in their favour, that the day on which they went was
rather damp, and there was only one grocer's shop open. If anyone
should be disposed to take their verdict as more conclusive than ours,
we can simply say, "Believe neither, but go and see for yourself."

There is one other subject worth mentioning, in regard to which we had
a trifling diversion on the morning of our departure. The true breed of
Pyrenean dogs may be seen at Cauterets, and puppies obtained by any
people who wish to have a specimen of this fine race. The great secret
in rearing them is to avoid meat of any kind, and feed them on bread
with a little milk, or very thin soup. It is not the climate of
England, as has so often been alleged, which gives them consumption,
but the change to rich diet from the meagre fare which in the mountains
they always receive.

The prices vary so much, that it is wisest for a stranger to enlist the
services of some trustworthy native to arrange the purchase, rather
than to do the bargaining himself. Pups from six weeks to three months
sell at from ten francs to one hundred, but a really fine specimen of
two and a half months ought to be bought for thirty-five francs. Dogs
of six months and upwards are expensive; as much as five hundred francs
being asked for them in the season.

As Miss Blunt had a great desire to become the possessor of one of
these fluffy creatures, whenever any were seen inquiries were always
directed at once with regard to their parentage and price. Happening to
perceive a woolly tail disappearing behind a workshop in the Rue de la
Raillere a few hours before we had to start, we passed up a short entry
beside the aforementioned workshop, and asked to see the owner of the
dogs. In a few seconds he stood before us, a weather-beaten Frenchman,
who, as well as his clothes and his intellect, had seen better days--a
man about five feet six inches high, with face deeply lined; moustache,
goatee, and hair, all somewhat sparse and grizzled; a blue berret (the
native hat) in his hand; his shirt fastened by a single stud, barely
hiding what had been once a brawny chest; his loose trousers
half-covered by a leathern apron; and his two coats both threadbare,
and decorated with ribands in an equally worn-out state--such, bowing
and smiling as he approached, was the proprietor alike of the dogs and
the workshop. In spite of his poor appearance and idiosyncrasy--almost
approaching to madness--he had a certain dignity of manner which we
could not fail to notice. But he was very trying to deal with. Whenever
the price was the object of our inquiry, he began in the following
strain: "Very good, very good; which does Monsieur like? which does
Ma'm'selle prefer? The finest of course? Ah yes, the finest! Ah, very
good; take your choice, Monsieur; take which you please. The finest
dogs in the world! See! see! Monsieur" (and here he pointed to the
ribands on his breast), "I gained the prize at the Paris
Exhibition!--at the Paris Exhibition!--the exhibition open to all the
world--I, with the dogs I had brought down from the mountains and bred
myself, I gained the prize. Ha! ha! there were two Englishmen, two of
your fellow-countrymen, who thought they would beat me; but no, no,
Monsieur, it was to me you see (pointing to his breast again),
Monsieur, that they gave the prize." At last, however, he named fifty
francs as the price of either, which was very excessive, and when I
suggested ten--which was proportionately low--he proceeded to take off
his apron, roll up his coat-sleeves, and then, looking at me fiercely,
said, "So, Monsieur, you take me for a ten-franc man, do you? You think
to mock me, do you? I, who gained the prize at the Paris Exhibition,
the exhibition open to all the world, for the finest dogs, you think I
will sell my puppies at ten francs, Monsieur? No, Monsieur. I will not
sell you one for ten francs, and I do not wish to have anything more to
do with you." And then he, who five minutes before had been shaking my
hand with delight because I knew the owner of the parent dog (of his
puppies), with a lofty wave of the hand motioned me to depart. Before
doing so I soothed his offended dignity by a mellifluous explanation,
and he once more, but somewhat loftily, offered me his hand as I bade
him farewell. So, in spite of the pleasant diversion, Miss Blunt did
not get her dog!




CHAPTER VI.

LUZ AND BAREGES.

Rain at starting--A blighted view, yet lovely still--Pont d'Enfer
--Nature's voice--Sere and Esquiez--Luz--Its situation and status--An
old house--The ancient Church of the Templars--La Chapelle de St.
Roch--Pyrenean museum--Hotel de l'Univers--Chateau de Ste. Marie--"The
Jackdaw's Causerie"--A new "Diet of Worms"--The new bathing
establishment--To Bareges--Pic d'Ayre--Esterre--Viella--Betpouey--Mill
conduits--Cercle des Etrangers--Opinion of the town--Grand
Etablissement--Promenade Horizontale--Hospice de Ste. Eugenie--"The Jay
of Bareges"--Wood anemones--Hepaticas--Valley of Lienz--Pic de
Lienz--Pic d'Ayre's summit--Pic de Neouville--Mountain rhododendrons
--_Anemone vernalis_.


Although we had beautiful weather all the while we remained in
Cauterets, directly we prepared to depart down came the rain, the mists
descended over the hills, and until we reached Pierrefitte we were
unable to obtain more than momentary glances at the beauty we had so
delighted in, before. Having crossed the Gave de Bareges by the Pont de
Villelongue, we were soon in the gorge, the rocks on the left of which
were blasted for five miles, when the road was constructed.
Notwithstanding that it still rained, the clouds were a little higher,
and our view consequently less contracted.

[Illustration: THE GORGE NEAR PIERREFITTE.]

The beauty of the scene was indisputable, and yet it was a beauty less
wild and majestic, and more unequal, than that of the Cauterets Gorge.
The heights on the left had frequently the barest and most
uninteresting appearance, when on the other side the eye was enchanted
with the varied spring tints on the trees massed together up the slopes
from the river, whose limpid green pools or foaming rapids gave such a
charm to the picture. The old road is seen in many parts, and several
of the old bridges, but the one about three and three-quarter miles
from Pierrefitte, at a point where the Gorge widens--known as the Pont
d'Enfer, and built partly of wood as well as stone--is by far the most
interesting. The scenery in its vicinity was particularly beautiful.
The wild quinces, with their white blossoms mingling with those of the
cherry and the light green of the maples, larches, elms, birches, and
limes; the bright fields above, and the ever-lovely river below; with
the massive crags and a babbling waterfall, rendered this part
especially--as well as several others in a lesser degree--enchanting.

An enthusiast might easily write a book on the beauty of this gorge
alone, but in this age he would probably find few readers; of those who
did look at his book the greater number would find it probably too
highly-coloured, while the more enthusiastic ones would lament its lack
of warmth. Not wishing to incur the displeasure of either, we refrain
from saying a great deal about the splendour of this drive; knowing
that to a lover of the beautiful in Nature, all we have left unsaid
Nature will herself say ten times more impressively.

After passing the monument in honour of the "Reine Hortense," which is
five miles from Pierrefitte, and crossing the Bridge de la Hiladere, we
soon caught sight of some villages on the left, where poplars--stiffly
prominent in all directions--spoil much of the picturesqueness of the
surroundings. The villages of Sere and Esquiez, that we saw when
nearing Luz, are ancient and worthy of a visit. Together they formed a
"chef-lieu" before the eleventh century, and the Roman church in each,
but especially that of Sere, is exceedingly interesting. A few moments,
during which we crossed a marble bridge over the Gave de Bastan, and,
bearing to the left, we were in Luz.

Denominated by various titles, from a "poor village" to a "small rustic
town," Luz is by no means an insignificant place. It doubtless owes a
great deal to its situation in a pleasant hollow among the hills, with
a pleasant landscape on all sides, and its appearance is certainly more
quaint and rustic than poor. Undoubtedly there are several old houses,
some looking particularly unsafe; undoubtedly the streets are often
very narrow; and perhaps the inhabitants on the whole may be far from
wealthy; but with all this Luz is not a poor looking village. On a
market-day the streets in the vicinity of the old church, built--partly
in the 12th and finished between the 15th and 16th centuries--by the
Templars, assume a wonderfully gay appearance, and towards the back of
the church we noticed one old house whose balconies, if a trifle warped
and weather-beaten under the thin covering of white paint, were
nevertheless bright with pots of geraniums, wallflowers, and stocks.

The church itself is most interesting, and was at one time very
formidable also. Surrounded by a high wall pierced with loopholes in a
double row, lies the graveyard, which is only a narrow strip between
the ramparts and the church, the body of which lies between two towers.
Under the higher of these, facing north, and built for defence with
loopholes and embrasures, is one of the church doors, which leads to
the high altar steps in a direct line from the entrance into the
churchyard. Further to the right, but also facing north, is the most
remarkable entrance, the inscriptions on the arch dating from the 12th
century. On the extreme right is a door leading into the chapel, built
in the 16th century, and dedicated to St. Roch. We found the inside
interesting, without possessing any very striking features.

[Illustration]

The effect from the main gallery is perhaps best, and the smaller ones
running along the sides have a weird and aged appearance. Near the
entrance to the church, low down, is shown what was once the door for
that wretched race of beings, the "Cagots."

[Footnote: We found it difficult to obtain any reliable information
about these creatures. They seem to have led an existence like the
lepers in Palestine, being avoided and despised by the inhabitants
generally, and they appear to have been both diminutive and ugly.(See
St. Savin, p. 73).]

The Chapelle de St. Roch, which we passed into from the gallery in the
main building, is the most striking of the two. The gallery and stairs
were in a very shaky condition, and two candle-stands near the latter
seemed to have been in their prime many generations ago. The vaulted
roof, with the curious wooden groins, and the ancient _benitier_
near the door, are worthy of inspection. Without scrambling up the
tower to the "Pyrenean Museum," but not forgetting to examine the old
bell-tower and its bells facing west, we walked down to the left and
joined the main road.

The ancient Castle de Sainte Marie--a very interesting and historic
ruin--being in the vicinity, we followed the principal highway to the
right, and passing the much-recommended Hotel de l'Univers, were soon
in the proximity of the chateau, which, standing alone on the summit of
a pointed hill, was charmingly conspicuous. The path, after winding up
the hill, leads to an entrance at the back, which is locked, the castle
being now the property of the Precepteur of Luz, who, however, is
always willing to accommodate strangers by allowing them to enter, as
well as to inspect his garden, and the very striking image of the
Virgin which he has had perched on the front walls. A great number of
jackdaws have taken up their quarters in the old towers, and as one of
them kept continually cawing as though anxious to be heard, we append
what we made out to be the meaning of his chatter (it is said they
never speak without _cause_), which we call

"THE JACKDAW'S CAUSERIE."

"THE JACKDAW'S CAUSERIE."

Caw, caw! cried the jackdaw, and cawed again,
As he circled out of the ancient tower:
Caw, caw! and he circled thrice over the plain,
And cawed once more as he reached his bower.

Caw, caw! I was born in this fortress old,
As old as the hills, some folks might say;
Five hundred centuries, caw, have rolled
Since first it stood in the light of day.

Caw, caw! just to think I have built my nest
Where the Black Prince ruled in such royal state.
Caw, caw! I wonder if ever he guess'd
That this would in time be his castle's fate.

Caw, caw! but I never could quite perceive
Why one tower is round and the other square.
If I'd been the prince, I can well believe
I'd have made the architect build a pair.

Caw, caw! by-the-bye, there was old Coffite[1]
And Jean de Bourbon, that fought so well;
And 'tis said that the prince underwent defeat--
At least my mother this tale would tell.

Caw, caw! they've finished with siege and fight;
The castle's too old for that, of course;
They go in for piety on the right,[2]
And we caw away till our voice grows hoarse.

Caw, caw! I'm a Catholic right sincere,
But somehow or other I cannot see
Why they put up the Virgin's statue[3] here--
The place is as wrong as a place could be.

Caw, caw! I must see how my youngsters look
In their quiet nursery 'mid the stones;
Next week they'll be able "to take their hook,"[4]
And--but there they go with their squeaking tones.

Caw, caw! cried the jackdaw, the world is vain,
But I love to dwell in my ancient tower.
Caw, caw!--why the wretches want feeding again,
They've a "diet of worms" nearly every hour.
And he cawed as he flew to the nursery bower.

[Footnote 1: It is said that Jean de Bourbon, Comte de Clermont, and
Auger Coffite of Luz, took this castle in 1404.]

[Footnote 2: The author does not hold himself responsible for the
jackdaw's slang, which refers to the statue.]

[Footnote 3: This statue is in honour of "Notre Dame de Lourdes."]

[Footnote 4: Again the jackdaw indulges in slang!]

Leaving the jackdaw to pursue his paternal duties, we descended again
to the town, and sheltered awhile from a shower under the balcony of
the new and gaudy-looking bathing establishment, that stands in the
outskirts, towards St. Sauveur. These baths, which are only opened
during the summer, are supplied with water from Bareges, whither we
were only waiting for a fine day to make an excursion. But fine days
just then were rather hard to find, so we contented ourselves with one
that did not look very ominous, and taking a good lunch with us,
started in a landau and four at ten o'clock.

[Illustration: THE CASTLE OF STE. MARIE.]

The road after leaving Luz follows the course of the Gave de Bastan,
skirting in turn the base of the Montaigu [Footnote: Not to be in any
way confounded with the Montaigu near Bigorre. The French mountain
vocabulary is so defective, they often call several heights by the same
name.] and that of the Pic d'Ayre, and, passing through the villages of
Esterre (2 miles), Viella (2-1/4 miles), and Betpouey (3-1/2 miles),
winds in steep zigzags up to Bareges (4064 ft.).

This valley, after what we had seen, did not give us much pleasure; its
appearance on the whole being sterile, though after leaving Luz as far
as Esterre, the brightness of the fields and trees, and the splashing
of the water overflowing the miniature mill conduits, made a pleasant
landscape.

The actual distance from Luz to Bareges is barely four miles, and yet
so great is the height of the latter (1600 ft. above Luz) that it was
nearly one o'clock when we pulled up at the Cercle des Etrangers--the
only specimen of a hotel or cafe open--for our lunch.

After a pleasant meal we made a move to inspect the town and its
environs, and were not long in forming an opinion, at any rate, on the
former, which we think most visitors at this season of the year would
be inclined to endorse. One long ascending street lined with houses all
shut up, occasional breaks where a narrow alley or the roads to the
hospitals and promenades branched off, the bathing establishments under
much-needed repair, the dirty-looking river dashing down behind, on the
left; the beech boughs clad in dead leaves rustling on the slopes, in
the opposite direction; and a few natives here and there, very untidy
and sleepy-looking, as though with difficulty awaking from the
"dormouse" state, complete the picture of Bareges, which we need hardly
add is in itself a most desolate and dreary-looking place. In
mid-summer, with the sun shining and the trees in full leaf, an
improvement in the scene would be noticeable; but very few, except
invalids specially recommended for a course of the waters, are at
anytime likely to stay there more than a few hours.

[Illustration: BAREGES.]

We took the road leading up, to the right of the "Grand Etablissement,"
to the Promenade Horizontale, the great summer rendezvous, and passing
the "Hospice de Ste. Eugenie" began the ascent up the easy zigzags of
the "Allee Verte." We had not made much progress when we startled, from
what was doubtless a contemplative mood, a very fine jay. He did not
seem to like the disturbance at all, but kept flying from branch to
branch in the vicinity, repeatedly uttering his guttural cries.

As the tenor of his thoughts--uttered in rather a shrill treble--seemed
to bear considerably on topics of general interest, in spite of the
apparent selfishness that was the key-note of the whole, we think it
expedient to let posterity enjoy the enlightenment we received from

"THE JAY OF BAREGES."

  Lawks a mussy! and shiver my feathers!
    Why this is a wonderful sight;
  In spite of my earnest endeavours,
    I can't quite get over my fright.

  'Tis so long since the strangers departed,
    They ne'er would return, I had thought;
  So no shame at their coming I started,
    Though perchance I felt worse than I ought.

  Still to think through the days cold and lonely
    I've wandered about at my will,
  With no one to chase me, and only
    The need to prevent getting chill.

  Well, I say--when I think of the quiet
    And rest that is now at its close--
  I have doubts of enduring the riot
    After such a long time of repose.

  It is not that I hate to see pleasure,
    It is not that the world I detest;
  But I like to have comfort and leisure,
    And not to be teased and oppress'd.

  I don't mind the smell from the fountains,
    --Though a rotten-egg scent is not sweet--
  For I always can fly to the mountains
    And seek some umbrageous retreat.

  Then the season for shooting is over,
    So the sportsmen[1] will leave me alone,
  And I'll pose as a Go(u)ld Jay in clover,
    Avoiding a _dollar_ous tone.

 To my doctor, perhaps, 'twould be better
    The final decision to leave;
  And I'll follow his choice to the letter,
    He's a bird I can always believe.

  That reminds me 'tis time for my dinner,
    And as I don't wish it to wait,
  As sure as I'm saint and no sinner,
    I'll be off at my very best rate.

[Footnote 1: The jay, with all its sophistry, did not apparently know
that French sportsmen only kill what they can eat, and therefore its
fears would in any case have been groundless.]

And with a concluding chuckle the bright bird disappeared. We were by
this time beyond the "Forest Administration" hut, and close upon the
snow, which lay in narrow but deep drifts among the trees, the wood
anemones and fine hepaticas growing in groups close by.

As we gradually progressed, the snow occupied the greater part of the
way, and we were forced to betake ourselves to the extreme edge; and
when at last we emerged into the Vallee de Lienz, trees and branches
had to be scrambled over to avoid a wetting, although we were obliged
to cross one or two drifts after all. Getting clear of the trees, we
came in full view of the imposing Pic de Lienz (7501 ft.) on the left,
and the rounded summit of the Pic d'Ayre (7931 ft.). Passing the two
cabins constructed among the rocks in the open, we crossed the swift
brook and began the ascent of the inferior but well-wooded hill below
the Pic de Lienz. There is no proper path up to this Pic (as to most
others), and the grass is rather bad for walking; but the views up the
valley to the mighty Pic de Neouville (10,146 ft.), and the whole range
behind the Pic d'Ayre, are very grand. We only went to the bend just
before the summit of the Col, resting awhile among a huge pile of
boulders, brightened by bushes of the mountain rhododendron, before
commencing to descend. A fine specimen of the rather rare _Anemone
vernalis_ was a prize that fell to us as we carefully balanced
ourselves on the slippery tufts which so often, carrying the feet along
at an increased speed, cause the owner to find himself rather
unpleasantly acquainted with mother earth. However, we reached the huts
again in safety, and made considerably shorter cuts on our way back to
the town, encountering a solitary sheep with a very young lamb at one
of our sharp turns.

We arrived at the cafe just in time for tea, and then the horses were
put in and we rattled back, having, in spite of the barrenness of
Bareges, spent a very pleasant day.




CHAPTER VII.

ST. SAUVEUR.

Pont de Pescadere--Sassis--Gave de Gavarnie--St. Sauveur--Hotel de
France--Pont Napoleon--Napoleon's pillar--Bee orchids--Chapel of
Solferino--The view from thence--Ne'er a hermit but for gold--Luz
Cemetery--Luz Post Office--Short cuts--Pharmacie Claverie--Jardin a
l'Anglaise--Ascent of Pic de Bergons--Villenave--The shepherds'
huts--Lunch--Snow, its use and abuse--On foot--"Excelsior"--Dangerous
footing--The last crest but one--The view--Gavarnie and Argeles in
sight--A lazy guide--A "fast" bit--Mountain flowers--Mr. Sydney to the
fore--A short walk and a good view--To Sazos and Grust--The bathing
establishments--Sazos: the old church--The belfry--Chiming
extraordinary--Various promenades--Gems of hill and vale.


At the bridge known as the Pont de Pescadere the road from Pierrefitte
forks; the branch to the left leads to Luz, while the road to St.
Sauveur branches off to the right, and passes through the village of
Sassis, above which is the more important one of Sazos. Then, keeping
to the riverside till within half a mile of the town, it throws out a
branch over the Gave de Gavarnie to Luz, and bending in the opposite
direction, winds steeply past the baths to the hotels.

Like many of the villages in Japan, and especially along the great
Nakasendo, St. Sauveur possesses one single street. The resemblance
continues further with the fine scenery, but there it ends. The look of
the houses and the comfort of the Hotel de France find, alas! no
parallel yet in the interior of that wonderful country.

[Illustration: ST. SAUVEUR.]

We came to St. Sauveur direct without stopping at Luz, but as the
latter is the larger town--in fact the mainstay of the former, and also
the nearer to Pierrefitte--we have given it precedence. For situation
and all other qualifications, except as a residence in winter, St.
Sauveur easily bears away the palm. The morning after our arrival, when
the sun was shining brightly, we walked up through the remainder of the
diminutive town to the Pont Napoleon, one of the most remarkable
bridges in the Pyrenees. The bridge itself is 216 feet above the river,
and sixty-nine feet wide; but it is not so much the construction
--though that is well carried out--as the position, which
especially attracts on a lovely spring morning. The river, of a
beautiful light green tint, wandering down the valley towards
Pierrefitte, the trees with varied foliage crowding the slopes above,
the glimpse of Saint Sauveur with its church, and the hills with the
snowpeaks beyond, on either side--made such a glorious _ensemble_
as we were not slow to appreciate.

[Illustration: PONT NAPOLEON, ST. SAUVEUR.]

But this was not all--nor nearly all--for not only had we the view of
the grand rocky gorge from which the river issues above, but we could
also take the easy gradient down to the riverside itself, which leads
from the near side of the bridge, as well as survey the loveliness from
the terrace at the base of the arch, on the side beyond. Having crossed
this fine piece of engineering, and passed the pillar surmounted by an
eagle erected in honour of Napoleon III. and the Empress Eugenie, we
found the road led at right angles in both directions. The one to the
right, to Gavarnie, we hoped to take thither later; the one to the
left, leading to Luz, we followed there and then. After curving once or
twice within view of the bridge, it bifurcates, forming an upper and a
lower route, both of which lead to Luz, if desired. The lower, which is
the direct route from Gavarnie to Luz, we abstained from taking,
preferring the upper road to the right, which leads past fields
resplendent with flowers (among which the "bee" orchid is noticeable),
to the chapel of Solferino.

The view from the hill on which the chapel is built is an excellent
one. Looking towards Luz, several small villages may be seen up the
Bareges valley, with the Pic de Mont Aigu, and the Pic d'Ayre (7931
feet) on the right, and--immediately over against the town--the Pic de
Nere on the left. Looking towards Pierrefitte, other small villages,
and the whole of the Luz valley; on the left, St. Sauveur, and, above
the almost indistinguishable village of Sassis, the Col de Riou, with
the Pic de Viscos beyond. Looking towards the Pont Napoleon, the Pic de
Bergons (6792 ft.) towers up on the left, and on the right may be
easily noted the toothed Pic du Lac Grand the Col d'Aubiste, and the
loftier Pic (8863 ft.) of the same name, besides a glimpse of pastures
and foaming cascades as well. There is very little in the chapel itself
except its history and its cold atmosphere. It is supposed to be an
exact copy of the ancient Hermitage of St. Peter, which formerly stood
on the same spot. The bones of the last good man, for whom "gaieties
had no attraction whatever," and who consequently shut himself up for
"years and years" in the dismal building, were collected by Napoleon
III.'s command, and buried under the statue erected in front. There is
a woman that calls herself the guardian (not angel) of the place, and
demands a small gratuity in exchange for any amount of unnecessary
talking; judging by her appearance, we decided she was _not_ a
hermit nor a particularly small eater either, though her stature was
decidedly diminutive. Two tracks lead from this hill to Luz. One
winding down on the left forms the branch route to St. Sauveur, the
other, to the right--which we took--passes the cemetery, and leaving
the new church in the same direction, leads to the back of the ancient
fane of the Templars, through the town.

After transacting a little business at the post-office (there is none
at St. Sauveur except in the season), which stands in one of the
principal streets traversed on the route to Bareges, we returned to St.
Sauveur by another way. The ordinary short cut from Luz to St. Sauveur
crosses the bridge over the Gave leaving the Gavarnie road on the left,
and turning sharply up a short distance beyond the river, joins the
high road above the "Pharmacie Clavarie," near an ornamental pillar.
We, however, bore up the Gavarnie road till, reaching a cottage, we
pursued the narrow path obviously conducting to the river, over which a
wooden bridge--whence a pretty view can be obtained,--leads to the
Jardin a l'Anglaise. This garden, much frequented during the summer
months, brought us in turn, by means of zigzags and steps, close to our
hotel, and though it may be slightly longer than the "short cut," we
certainly found it prettier and more agreeable.

There is one excursion from St. Sauveur, which is not very difficult
nor laborious, and which well repays the certain amount of exertion
that is at all times associated with ascents. This is the ascent of the
Pic de Bergons. Although we could tell before we started that the snow
would prevent us from reaching the summit, we nevertheless had hopes of
arriving very near it; and finding a beautiful day, as it were, staring
us in the face, we ordered round the horses and a somewhat aged guide,
and were in motion by ten o'clock. Reaching the further end of the Pont
Napoleon, we found the path striking off immediately before us, and the
work began. The gradient for several minutes rose rather sharply, and
as the road was anything but a pleasant or even one, the labour for the
horses was considerable; but they went very willingly, until, at our
arrival at a couple of cottages, we halted to give them a few minutes'
rest.

Until then we had been winding up the face of the hill, but after
leaving the cottages, the track bearing round to the side brought us
above Luz, over which and the whole valley we had a splendid view. Not
far from this point, the path from Luz, _via_ Villenave, joined
in, but no improvement in the general unevenness and stoniness of it
was effected. With a barren gorge on our left, and the green pastures
with the snow-peaks of Bugaret and Maucapera towering behind them,
straight before us, we followed the disagreeable zigzags, our horses
always on the very edge, as though courting our overthrow, till,
finding on reaching the "cabanes" some shepherds kindly and well
disposed, we repaired to the shelter that their cow-house wall
afforded, to eat our lunch. The meal was a success, as such meals, when
the victuals are good and the appetites hearty, usually are, and the
_vin ordinaire_, cooled to a pleasant extent with snow from a
neighbouring drift, tasted like nectar. But the same snow which was so
delightful in the claret, interfered sadly with our locomotion, and
having finished our luncheon, we had next to dispose of our horses, and
commence the rest of the ascent on foot. Striking straight up from the
hut, we soon attained a narrow track winding up the wooded hill to the
left, and without much difficulty or exertion, found ourselves within
view of St. Sauveur, and a great part of the mountains and valleys.
However, we were yet some way from the summit, or even the highest
attainable point (the summit being unattainable on account of snow), so
we pulled ourselves into form, and whispering to one another to have
"courage," we moved upwards again. A small rocky backbone was next
attained, but still the higher crests remained, and seemed to say,
"Excelsior." The guide got lazy, and preferred to study a little
geology to mounting any higher, so we left him to pursue his researches
and strode on. Between the next point, gained after some little work,
and the last crete below the actual summit, several banks of snow lay,
and rendered progress difficult. In two places a sharp decline, with no
chance of clutching anything in case of falling, presented itself to
dull our hopes, but by dint of using the alpenstocks well, and making
deep tracks in the semi-melting snow, we reached the desired crest,
with nothing but the white and inaccessible summit above. The view was
a very fine one, and fully justified all expectations, although our
lazy guide was effectually shut out from our gaze. The miniature town
of St. Sauveur looked like a tiny model, with every accessory that
could add to its charming position. To the left, high above us, the
mighty Barbe de Bouch (9624 ft.) stood out just below the clouds, in
which the still loftier and very stony Pic d'Ardiden (9804 ft.) was
partially hidden. Further in the same direction the familiar forms of
the Pics d'Aubiste and Litouese, and further yet, the Tour and Casque
of the Gavarnie Cirque, stood out as snowy and as clear as the most
eager sightseer could wish. Over the town itself the Pic du Lacgrand,
and down the valley to the right, the Col de Riou and the Pic de
Viscos, were plainly visible; while the town of Argeles and the hills
beyond it, required no glass to point out their position at the end of
the splendid gorge. Over against Luz the Col d'Arbeousse and the Pic de
Nere (7880 ft.); with the Pic Bugaret (8859 ft.), the Maucapera (8893
ft.), and the massive Mont Arrouye (10,299 ft.), facing them, above the
hut where we had lunched, added their attractions to swell the beauty
of our view.

When we thought we had really taken in all that we could, we did not
stay on our lofty perch much longer, fearing the result of our guide's
geological researches; however, we found him still fairly well, and
very little less lazy, so took him for a little jolting down a rather
"fast" bit, which not only woke him up, but brought us quickly down to
our shepherd's hut again. Partly riding and partly walking, the rest of
the descent was successfully accomplished, including the gathering of
gentians, bee orchids, mountain violets, and both _Polygalae_;
[Footnote: _Polygala rosea_ and _P. amara._] while Mr. Sydney
triumphed in the very laudable effort of showing the lazy guide how
things could be managed, by arriving at the foot of the mountain some
twenty minutes before him. A very short trot brought us to the hotel in
time for some half-past five tea, having taken seven and a half hours
over our trip, including the hour spent for lunch.

Between the Hotel de France and the Pont Napoleon a narrow path strikes
up to the right, almost opposite a large white house a short distance
beyond the church; this we found a very pleasant quarter of an hour's
walk, leading by an easy gradient to a good point of view. Box plants,
with their bright leaves here and there changing into a rich red, lined
the way, and many flowers, including gentians, added their charm. From
the rock at which we terminated our walks, a fine view of the Pic de
Bergons, two cascades, the gorge towards Gavarnie and St. Sauveur, the
Pont Napoleon, and a small defile on the immediate right, was our
reward.

Another pleasant promenade and not a very long one, which we much
enjoyed, was to the villages of Sazos and Grust, in the direction of
the ascent of the Col de Riou and the Pic de Viscos. We followed the
high road down through the town, passing in turn the Roman-like and
commodious baths, the path leading to the Hontalade establishment on
the left, and the Pharmacie Claverie on the right; and just before the
branch route from Luz joins in, took the left track up the side of the
hill. Pretty views of the different valleys unfolded to our gaze as we
continued on our way, while a splendid vista of villages lay before us
when we reached the platform space on which an iron cross is erected, a
short way below Sazos. The village itself, as well as that of Grust,
which lies within easy distance above it, is a quaint, old-fashioned
place. The church is the chief attraction; in fact, immediately Miss
Blunt found herself within the ancient exterior portal, she demanded
paper and pencil, and although all the paper forthcoming was the back
of an envelope and a telegraph form, managed to turn out an efficient
representation of the old Roman fane. In exploring it afterwards at our
leisure, we were struck by several peculiarities which produced mingled
feelings. Inside the doorway, two curious flights of steps lead to the
narrow galleries and the belfry, the final flight being totally devoid
of either "sweetness" or light. Having examined the bells and heard the
clock strike three, we began the descent. In the darkness we certainly
did clutch a vertical rope, but could that simple act--we ask in a
whisper--have had such an unusual effect as causing the clock to repeat
its striking? For, whether or not, before we reached the ground, the
three strokes rang out again. The carving over the altar is good, and
the general effect of the whole church is likewise; but the supposed
model of the grotto at Lourdes, and the awful painting in the side
altar on the left, certainly do not add to its beauty.

The children regarded us with inquisitive looks as we came away, but
seemed to wish to keep at a safe distance. Whether the double striking
of the clock had had a peculiar effect on them we did not, however,
wait to inquire, but after taking a drink at the fountain, proceeded on
our homeward way.

Any one making a lengthened stay can find out plenty of similarly
enjoyable walks; in fact, one of St. Sauveur's chief charms lies in its
favourable situation for such pursuits. The neighbourhood is very rich
in flora, small jonquils, daffodils, oxslips, hyacinths, violets,
_polygala, potentilla_, anemones, _Ramondia pyrenaica, Primula
farinosa,_ large and small gentians, _linaria,_ and bee orchids
being among the easiest to find.

Before we started on the great drive to Luchon, we successfully
accomplished a delightful day's outing to Gavarnie, but as it is full
of interest and majesty, we give it a chapter to itself.




CHAPTER VIII.

GAVARNIE.

A "falling glass"--The wonderful echo--Cascade Lassariou--Sia and its
bridge--Pont de Desdouroucat--"Changing scenes"--Bugaret torrent--The
Pimene--Bue--Gedre--Breche de Roland in the distance--The
"Grotto"--Scenery at fivepence per head--Daffodils--Lofty
summits--Cascade d'Arroudet--Chaos--Valley of the "Ten Thousand Rocks,"
Amoy--A dirty avalanche--The Sugar-loaf--Travellers' troubles
--Importunate females--Hotel des Voyageurs--Poc--Guide or no
guide--Chute de Lapaca--The guardian summits of the Cirque--Cascade du
Marbore--Chandelles du Marbore--The Cirque--Its marvellous
beauty--Reluctantly returning--"The Guide's Auction"--"Two women
enough for a market, and three for a fair"--A Yankee tale--Sketching
and flowers--Tempers and appetites.


There is no excursion from Luz or St. Sauveur for which it is so
necessary to have a fine day, or which is so wonderfully unique, as
that to the Cirque of Gavarnie. We were forced to wait several days;
the barometer always, stupidly enough, wanting to fall, until on the
third day of the moon it slowly began to rise, and gave us hopes for a
start on the following morning. The following morning arrived, and with
it a heavy fall of snow, decking the hills quite low down with a white
mantle, and gloomily screening the view.

However, about nine o'clock, the sun burst forth, the clouds rose, the
blue sky appeared, and we felt that our opportunity had come. The lunch
and the landau, with four horses, were ordered for ten o'clock, and at
10.15 we were on our way. Through the town, past the church and over
the fine Pont Napoleon we went, our hearts--eager to appreciate
--finding no lack of food.

Keeping along the base of the Pic de Bergons, with the Pic du Lac Grand
rivalling it on the other side of the defile, we soon sighted the chasm
and cascade of Rioumaou on our left, and reached the Pas de l'Echelle.
At 1 metre 50 centimetres, or 43/4 feet, from the extremity of the
ornamental facing which marks the place, we pulled up, to try the
magnificent echo, and were in no way disappointed. Our voices came back
particularly clearly, but from the coach-box the sound was stronger. On
ahead again, still by the base of the Pic de Bergons, with the mighty
Col and Pic d'Aubiste (8863 ft.) majestic across the river; till, at
the foot of the Pic, where the sparkling Cascade de Lassariou comes
tumbling down, the wretched hamlet of Sia, with its "quatre moulins"
and very fine bridge, broke into view. Traversing the Pont de
Sia--distant about three miles from Luz and built when the new road was
made two years ago--we kept the right side of the Gave, and, with the
Pic de Litouese towering above us, reached the Pont de Desdouroucat (4
3/8 miles), and again passed to the opposite bank, leaving the remains
of the old route on the side whence we came. The sky was clearing more
and more, and before us, over Gavarnie, it was one pure expanse of
blue. The gorge was very wild, but with a wildness of piled-up crags
and blackened sides that the beautiful winding river and the spring
tints helped to beautify and subdue. Presently the massive Brada, up
the grand Gorge de Bacheviron, came in sight on our left, and as we
passed the insignificant hamlet of Pragneres (43/4 miles), where the
torrent of Bugaret dashes down into the Gave, the Brada looked more
massive still. Thus it continued all along the route, every bend of the
road bringing something new--whether a cascade, a valley, or a lofty
peak, always something to claim attention and praise. At such a bend,
shortly after quitting Pragneres, the great snow-crowned Pimene (9193
ft.) seemed to bar the way; while at another, the hamlet of Bue and the
Col de Bue appeared on the right, and at another, again, Mont Ferrat
(10,575 ft.), up the Heas valley on the left. Not very much further,
when bending into Gedre, we obtained a splendid glimpse of La Tour and
La Casque du Marbore and the Breche de Roland. Gedre (8 miles), like
all the rest of the villages or hamlets in the vicinity, is a
miserable, poverty-stricken-looking place, but with picturesque
surroundings. It is a good centre for numerous excursions--notably that
to the Cirque de Troumouse--and possesses an excellent botanist as
well as a celebrated grotto.

[Footnote: The grotto's notoriety is gained, perhaps, by its imposture;
it is in reality no grotto, but a very pretty bit of scenery
nevertheless, on a fine day.]

Stopping at the house by the bridge, we were escorted by the good woman
into her garden and down some steps to a platform, whence the so-called
grotto was to be surveyed. It is a very picturesque spot. The lofty
walls of perpendicular rock, the overhanging bushes and flowers, the
trees above, the field beyond, and the blue water of the Gave de Heas
foaming beneath, are charming enough, with the aid of rays of sunlight,
to make the spot famous, and the good woman chuckle as she pockets the
half-franc per head.

[Illustration: THE VILLAGE OF GEDRE.]

Starting again, we commenced the zigzag ascent past the church--the
road winding among fields golden with daffodils, mingling here and
there with the lovely blue of the gentians and the pink _Primula
farinosa_--towards the base of the Coumelie, the mule-path to the
Cirque de Troumouse leading through a field above us, as we reached the
zigzag's top. Still gently ascending round the foot of the Coumelie,
the pointed summit of the lofty Taillon (10,323 ft.) came into view
ahead, with the grandiose Campbieil (10,418 ft.) up the Heas valley;
and the Pic de Saugue immediately above on the right, from whose height
the splendid Cascade d'Arroudet, dashing past the shepherds' cottages,
launches its foaming showers into the river below. A few more graceful
curvings of the road and we entered the region so aptly termed "Chaos."
Attributed to an earthquake at the end of the fourteenth century,
rightly or wrongly, the fact nevertheless remains that one of the huge
buttresses of the Coumelie became detached from the main summit, and
dashed down in enormous blocks to the valley below. There they lie, the
road passing between, in the wildest and most indescribable confusion.
Here a heap piled one above another, there a mighty shoulder split in
twain by a conical fragment which rests in the breach that it made;
some towering above the road, others blocking the river below, a few
isolated and many half-buried; but all combining to form as wild and
wonderful a chaos as the eye could wish to gaze on, but which the pen
must fail to describe. Far away on the shores of China, at the port of
Amoy, is another scene which, though it must yield the palm to this, is
nevertheless one of a similarly wild nature. The "Valley of the Ten
Thousand Rocks," as the spot is called, in the midst of which stands a
joss-house (or temple), may be reached in a pleasant walk from the
harbour of Amoy, by way of the wonderful Rocking Stone, and along paths
lined with aloes and cacti. There the grass grows between the confusion
of boulders, and the Chinamen's incense ascends to the blue sky; but
these points of difference from the Chaos of Gavarnie, though tending
to subdue part of the barren wildness, nevertheless still leave a
resemblance between the two scenes that is worthy of record.

[Illustration]

Leaving this "boulder" region behind us, we passed through a huge
avalanche that stood in frozen filthiness far above the carriage on
each side of the road, while immediately over us on the left rose the
mountain from which it had come--rightly named the Sugar-loaf--and
opposite, on the right, the serrated summit of the Soum de Secugnac
(8442 ft.).

At this point one of the many nuisances which ought to be classed under
the head of "Travellers' Troubles," commenced. In the distance, but
coming swiftly towards us, or rather as swiftly as a broken-winded,
raw-boned, jolting apology-for-a-horse would allow, was _a_ woman,
and alas! in her train were several others; a few on or with donkeys,
but more on foot. In vain we told them that we would engage no donkeys
at all, and no horses till we reached our destination; in vain we bade
them allow us to "pursue the even tenor of our way" in peace, and hush
their high soprano tones. It was one perpetual babble in praise of
their horses, their donkeys, and their capabilities as guides, with the
constant repetition of the names of the surrounding peaks, which we
already knew perfectly well. When we reached the gorge which opens up
on the right, as though the earth had been split by some mighty shock,
and through which the majestic Vignemale (10,821 ft.) was perfectly
visible, the storm of voices directing our attention to the sight was
as loud as it was unsolicited. But happily we were then close to
Gavarnie, and crossing the bridge with a momentary glimpse at the
Cirque, we drew up at the door of the Hotel des Voyageurs.

After lunching and engaging our steeds, with an intelligent guide, who
answered to the euphonious name of "Poc," we left the greatly
disappointed donkey women still making a terrible clamour, and started
for the Cirque.

As far as finding out the proper route goes, and that is a long way, no
guide whatever is required, but in order to learn the names of the
various peaks and other interesting facts, it is distinctly necessary
to have one, unless the traveller possesses a very elaborate plan of
the vicinity.

Leaving the new bridge to the left, as well as a very ancient one, and
the plashing fall known as the "Chute de Lapaca," we turned round in
the opposite direction, and passing the "Hotel de la Cascade" and a
wooden hut, again turned to the left, down what, though an execrable
road, led, nevertheless, to the object of our desires. At this turn the
Pic d'Aspe reared above us on the right, succeeded by barren hills
covered with loose stones, but as we proceeded, the famous central
excursion--the Pimene (9193 ft.)--came in sight on the opposite side,
followed by the Breche d'Allanz, the Pic Rouge de Pailla (9107 ft.),
Pic d'Astazou (10,106 ft.), the Cylindre (10,916 ft), and even the
Marbore (9964 ft.) itself.

Between the Marbore and the Epaule de Marbore (10673 ft.), nearer the
centre of the Cirque, the celebrated Cascade du Marbore, (1380 ft. in
height) dashes during the warmer months. The curious summits known as
La Tour (9902 ft.) and La Casque (9862 ft.), almost equidistant from
the centre of the Cirque, on opposite sides, stood clearly before us,
with the snow lying below each in the serrated shapes which give rise
to the term "Chandelles du Marbore." The Breche de Roland was--as it
always is from this view--invisible, hidden behind the Pic de Sarradets
(8993 ft.); but the Fausse Breche beyond, and more to the right the
magnificent Taillon (10,323 ft.), and the Pic de Gabietou, with the
Port de Gavarnie--a peculiar shoulder-like rock, below them
both--filled up the semicircle in all its wonderful entirety. When at
last we reached the point whence the whole can be viewed to most
advantage, we did not require the assertion of the guide that we were
in enjoyment of one of the best days of the year, to increase our
admiration and delight.

The amphitheatre, standing before us like the ruins of some mighty
arena, in which the throngs of eager men and women and the blood of the
dying gladiator had long given place to the purifying snow; the summits
around uplifted towards the blue sky; the cascade, no longer dashing as
full of life and hope, but frozen in its course and hanging in icicles
between the rocks; the few uncovered crags scattered here and there,
relieving the dazzling whiteness of the "glace eternelle"; the sparse
trees down the outer slopes struggling to free themselves from their
winter cloak; the cloud of frost scintillating in the sunlight as a
mass of loosened snow rushed into the depths below;--was not such a
scene as this, presented to our gaze in unveiled splendour, more than
sufficient to bewilder in the intensity of its majesty and loveliness?

Yet even this was not all. The silence, the solemn and perfect silence,
that reigned over the whole, only broken by the dull sound of the
falling avalanche or the shrill voice of the restless crow, was so
evident and so powerful, and combined so impressively with the
marvellous beauty of the surroundings, that the heart could not fail to
recognise the sublimity of Nature and the omnipotence of Nature's God!

We stayed there for a long time, and with great reluctance turned our
horses' heads from the scene; while even when we had done so, we
stopped at nearly every bend of the road for another look.

[Illustration: THE CIRQUE OF GAVARNIE (IN SUMMER).]

The exact distance from the hotel to the extreme end of the Cirque is
calculated at 33/4 miles, but we traversed little more than two-thirds
of that distance, on account of the depth of the avalanches, which were
then melting far too quickly to allow of dry walking any further.

Arriving again at the hotel, the chatter of the women over some new
arrivals was as deafening as ever. Our good guide Poc considered it was
not to be borne any longer, so having counted the women and their
asses, he cleared a space in preparation for a mock sale at which they
were all to be put up, and having got us in front as make-believe
purchasers, proceeded with the business, which we called

 "THE GUIDE'S AUCTION."

  This way, sirs, this way! Will you please to walk up?
    The auction I'm ready to start:
  I'm instructed to sell all these valuable lots,
    And the bidding I hope will be smart.

  You see by the catalogue, forty clear lots--
    Thirty women; ten asses; some small.
  To proceed then, we'll take them, sirs, just as they are,
    Say forty fine donkeys in all.

  They've plenty of sinew, and as to their voice,
    I think about that you well know.
  The first lot then, gents; shall we say fifteen francs?
    Well then, ten; but that's rather too low.

  In our country for ladies we've heaps of respect,
    But we've fully enough and to spare;
  And we know that "two women a market will make,
    And that three are enough for a fair."[1]


       *       *       *       *       *

  Now then, gents, please be sharp! No advance? No advance?
    The candle[2] burns fast to the end.
  Ten francs for this wonderful native--ten francs!
    Why, surely, that's nothing to spend!

  No bidding? Good gracious! Why what shall I do
    To oblige you? I'll class them as one:
  Now what do you say for the whole forty lots?
    Make a bid, sirs, I want to have done.

  Fifty francs for the lot; see the candle's nigh out:
    Fifty francs, take them all as they rise.
  What! No one will buy them? Alas! I must say
    You're all most uncommonly wise.

  They clamour and chatter the whole of the day,
    I believe they snore loudly at night;
  Oh, if only a Barnum would take them away,
    You don't know how I'd dance with delight!

[Footnote 1: His exact words were, "Dans mon pays, monsieur, nous
disons qu'il faut trois femmes pour faire une foire, et deux pour un
marche."]

[Footnote 2: Alluding to the custom in France of burning bits of candle
to denote the time in which the bidding may proceed; usually when the
third piece goes out the bidding for the special lot is finished, and
the next is proceeded with.]

This last verse was very easy to understand, as the women are always
anxious to obtain occupation for a lesser remuneration[1] than the
qualified guides, who naturally dislike this interference between them
and their earnings, although no bad feeling really exists on the
matter.

[Footnote 1: There is a good tale told, _a propos_ of this, of a
gentleman in San Francisco who wanted some wood chopped. An American
offered to do it for a dollar, but a Chinaman asked only half. The
gentleman, thinking it best to help his own countryman, gave the Yankee
the job; but happening to pass the yard during the day, he found the
Chinaman busily at work. "Hullo!" cried he, "I didn't give the job to
you. Who told you to cut this wood?" "Melican man" (American man),
responded the pigtailer. "And how much is he paying you?" "Hap dollar,"
replied the Celestial. And the swell went away resolved never to help
his countryman again.]

After an enjoyable kettledrum, the tea being our own and made under
personal supervision, Miss Blunt perched herself on a hillock to
sketch, and Mr. Sydney explored the neighbourhood for flowers, of which
gentians were the principal object of his search. Both having in a
certain degree attained their ends, we started again at half-past four,
and after a pleasant drive, which lasted two hours instead of
three--the time occupied in coming--we reached our quarters in the best
of tempers and not with the worst of appetites.




CHAPTER IX.

FROM LUZ AND ST. SAUVEUR TO BAGNERES DE LUCHON.

A smiling valley--Lourdes again--The chapel in the crypt--St. Peter's
statue--Burnished toes--Solemn quietude--Preparing for the great
pilgrimage--"Ornamented" crosses--Mr. Sydney's new vocation, "guide,
philosopher, and friend"--Bigorre again--An open-air concert
--Harmonious echoes--Paying through the nose--The fete at
Payole--Sport a la francaise--Costumes--The view from the Col d'Aspin--
Arreau--Quaint houses--La Chapelle de St. Exupere--A whining
"gardien"--Eglise de Notre Dame--The River Neste--Hotel de
France--Borderes--Avajan--Louderville--Oxslips and cowslips--Wild
narcissus--Col de Peyresourde--The view--Garin--Cazaux--St.
Aventin--Lovely avenues--Our destination.


With a morning as lovely as the day of our arrival had been dreary, we
left at 9.15 for Bagneres de Bigorre, the first part of our long drive.
The valley, more fully clothed than it was a week ago, looked so fresh
in the warm sunlight, with the river winding along, that we felt very
loath to leave. The gorge below, all the way to Pierrefitte, added its
share of beauty, and the graceful white heath growing up its sides
loaded the air with a sweet scent. The wide expanse of the Argeles
valley, with the busy farmers ploughing, sowing, or cutting the heavy
clover crop; the lazy oxen ever patiently plodding beneath their heavy
burdens; the Chateau de Beaucens--where the orchids grow--perched up on
the hillside; the surrounding peaks throwing off their snowy garb; and
the beautiful young leaves and tints, everywhere mingling with the
brightness of the flowers blooming on the slopes or amid the waving
grasses, made a scene as picturesque as it was charming.

Compared with the scenery so far, the remainder of the drive to
Lourdes, which we reached in three hours from the time of starting,
though full of many pleasant corners in which the river heightened the
effect, was nevertheless not so fine; but Lourdes itself looked more
attractive than on our former visit. After lunch, while the horses were
resting, we drove in a local milord [Footnote: A kind of victoria.] to
the church, as we had omitted before to visit the chapel built in the
crypt underneath. In the entrance is the fine bronze statue of St Peter
clasping the key, similar to the one in Rome both in size and in the
highly-burnished appearance of the toes of the right foot, for which
latter the affectionate pilgrims are answerable. On either side of the
statue a corridor lined with marble tablets--presented by "grateful"
individuals in acknowledgment of cures and cleansings--and dotted with
confessional boxes, leads down to the chapel. The repulsive gaudiness
of the tinsel display in the church above it is almost absent here, and
though the same exaltation of the Virgin over our Saviour is manifest,
yet otherwise this chapel, with its vaulted roof and its quietude,
seems far more fitted for meditation and prayer.

Taking the easy gradient at the west end of the church, between the
grassy slopes planted with lilacs and other shrubs and trees, we
arrived at the grotto. A huge platform was in course of erection, for
the great pilgrimage expected from England in about a week, and the
noise of the workmen combined with the sparse gathering of
"worshippers" detracted greatly from the former pitiable solemnity of
the scene, though the stand of candles was flaring with light, and the
crutches, in their horrid rows, were still there.

We left Lourdes again at three o'clock, the sun still very warm, as the
lazy attitudes of the peasants working in the fields attested; and,
passing several crosses at the roadside--"ornamented" with pincers,
hammer, nails, and sword, with a bantam cock on the top--reached the
base of the col (600 feet high) which separates the respective basins
of the Adour and the Echez. Half-way up the hill we discovered Mr.
Sydney, who had walked on ahead, very busy with a team of oxen, towards
which, having encountered them without a driver, he had taken upon
himself to act as "guide, philosopher, and friend"; and by dint of
great application of his umbrella, open and shut, in the last-mentioned
capacity, he brought them to, and kept them at, a standstill by the
side of the road till the carriage passed.

From the top of the hill we enjoyed an extensive view, the Pic du Midi
de Bigorre standing out wonderfully clear. Descending again, we joined
the Tarbes road crowded with market carts, and leaving the village of
Montgaillard on the left, duly arrived at Bagneres de Bigorre, where we
were received with open arms by Monsieur and Madame Bourdette.

The morrow being Sunday, was spent in resting, the magnificent weather
still continuing. The trees on the Coustous and the different hills
around were at length well covered with foliage, and gave a prettier
appearance to the town, which the ever-flowing streams by the
roadsides greatly added to. In the evening the Orpheon (or local Choral
Society) gave an open-air concert from the roof of one of the Coustous
cafes. A tremendous crowd of some 2000 persons had gathered under the
trees to listen, and kept perfectly still while the songs proceeded.
The solos were not particularly wonderful, but the beautiful blending
of the voices in the Pyrenean part-songs was a very great treat, and
the sounds, floating deliciously away on the soft evening air, could be
heard like some whispering echo for a long distance.

[Illustration: ]

We had some difficulty in arranging for a carriage, on the following
day, for Luchon, as a great number had been engaged for the fete at
Payole, and for those not yet taken high prices--considering the time
of year--were asked. Not wishing, however, to lose a day, we settled
for a landau and three horses to do the journey in two days--for 110
francs, including _pourboire_--stopping the night at Arreau. The
day broke, like its predecessors, perfectly fine, and at 10.30 we made
our adieus to Bigorre, and were on our way.

The scenery all the way to Payole was more charming than when we drove
there [Footnote: See pages 40-44.] previously, and on our arrival at
the Hotel de la Poste there was a considerable difference visible
there. The courtyard was filled with carriages, and a busy throng
buzzed about the doors, while the windows were occupied by a variety of
forms. Having with great difficulty secured utensils, we unearthed the
lunch, and proceeded with our meal at a side-table. The participators
in the fete, who were all men, occupied the centre table, and others
were at the side. The noise they made was not appetising, and though
they mixed wines considerably, their jokes did not improve; yet the
scene was a very typical one of "Frenchmen out for a holiday." After
our repast, we adjourned to see the fete, and a wonderful treat it was!
Tame rabbits and fowls, fastened to a stake driven into the hillside,
some 90 to 100 yards from the road, were the targets, at which a
perpetual round of shots soon commenced. Double-barrelled guns loaded
with ball were the usual weapons; one or two single-barrelled pieces
and a rifle or two being occasionally seen.

The marksmen seemed peculiarly poor ones, from the country lad, or the
genuine 'Arry, with huge check clothes, to the moustached "masher,"
with tight trousers and rounded jacket. About one "poulet" in fifty
shots succumbed, and a white rabbit's dismissal was received with loud
acclamations.

At 2.30, exactly two hours after our arrival, we were off again, and
soon entered the pine forest. It looked very bonny in the bright
sunlight, while the view from the Col d'Aspin was singularly
felicitous. Not a cloud anywhere. The mighty Posets, the Pic d'Arbizon,
and the other snow-crowned heights, softened by distance and beautified
by the tints in the foreground, stood out against the azure sky in all
their splendour.

The Aure valley, as we descended, and the tiny hamlet of Aspin, looked
very peaceful and lovely; in fact, the whole of the extensive
scene--considered one of the finest to be enjoyed by driving in the
Pyrenees--seemed to spread out its charms before us.

Winding down the splendid road, Arreau was soon in view, and at 4.30 we
drove under the portico of the Hotel de France, somewhat dusty, but
wholly pleased. With some time to spare before dinner, we set out to
explore this wonderfully quaint, and--though dirty--strikingly
picturesque old town. A road leads from the courtyard of the hotel
straight to the very ancient-looking market-place and the river, at
which point the latter is crossed by a very old wooden bridge.
Traversing this, and passing several curious houses with verandahs
reaching over the street, we found ourselves at the ancient Chapelle de
St. Exupere, built during the 9th and 10th centuries, but now restored.
The windows are of fine stained glass, and the view from the belfry
tower, over the peculiar old town--with its curious turrets and roofs,
whose best days have long passed--is worth the somewhat arduous mount
to get to it. The peasant girl who stands inside the door, and in a
sing-song voice that never varies mixes up saints, fathers, towns,
corn, potatoes, bells, and "quelque chose pour le gardien," in her
rigmarole, was the least attractive adjunct of the venerable pile!

Down a little alley, across the river, directly opposite the church,
Miss Blunt discovered a suitable spot for a sketch, [Footnote:
Unhappily this sketch was afterwards lost, so cannot be reproduced] and
on the production of materials and a chair from a neighbouring grocer's
she set to work, and in spite of the nearness--we might say the "too
odoriferous nearness "--of a dust-heap, a drain, and a swarm of midges,
she gallantly pursued her task till it reached a highly satisfactory
termination.

Leaving the "ambrosial spot" (Jupiter save us!) we followed the road
leading past the old market-place at right angles to the wooden bridge,
and reached the church of Notre Dame. Though more modern than the
"Chapelle," it is at least three centuries old, having been built on
the ruins of the one originally erected in the 12th century. The wooden
reredos behind the altar, and other wooden carvings, seemed especially
good, but the cure, jingling a bunch of keys, preceded by an abbe,
seemed anxious to see us depart; so we prematurely left. Strolling back
through the town, and over the stone bridge that spans the Neste, we
walked for a short distance on the other side, and then past the
post-office and the Hotel du Midi, to our own quarters for dinner. The
Hotel de France, as it is called, is the best in Arreau, but is
nevertheless not much more than a fairly large country inn. The rooms
are very clean, and the food good, but the arrangements are somewhat
primitive; yet for all this we were very well satisfied on the whole,
though the necessity of starting at nine o'clock next morning prevented
us indulging in rhapsodies.

When we left the courtyard and passed through the back part of the town
by the old church, the sky was still of the same lovely hue, though
unhappily there was hardly a breath of wind. Notwithstanding that
Arreau is charmingly placed, and that the trees were fairly forward
there, we soon found at a very slight increase of altitude that this
was not to last; in fact, almost at once after passing Borderes (2-1/4
miles)--an old village with a castle of Jean V., a change was
apparent. Two miles further brought us to the insignificant hamlet of
Avajan, and another three of continual ascent to the outskirts of
Louderville (3280 ft.), with its old watch-tower (14th cent.) and cool
cascade. Here we had a fine view of the valley below, and passed fields
covered with oxslips, cowslips, and other flowers; while lower down,
meadow after meadow was whitened by the lovely wild narcissus.
Following at a very easy pace the long zigzags (two hours and a half
from Arreau), we reached the highest point of the road at the Port or
Col de Peyresourde [Footnote: 35 miles from Bigorre, n. from Arreau.]
(5070 ft), whence the view, though much more limited than that from the
Col d'Aspin, extends over the valleys of Louron and Arboust, and many
snow-peaks as well.

As we descended the splendid winding road at a rattling pace, with the
slipper on the wheel, we quickly left barren trees and slopes behind,
and even at Garin, that curious village built among the rocks, the
silver birches were opening their leaves. Passing in turn the villages
of Cazaux, with its 12th century church, and St. Aventin, with its
double-towered church of a similar date, also, we sped under most
splendid avenues of sycamore, elm, lime, and ash, past dashing streams
and bright flower-clothed slopes--always descending--till we entered
Luchon: Luchon surrounded by magnificent hills, Luchon guarded by the
distant but ever-majestic snow summits, Luchon bathed in the scent of
lilac and other sweets, Luchon cooled and beautified by avenues and
squares of bright trees, and by gardens filled with the loveliest of
shrubs and flowers. Such was the Luchon presented to us as we drove
through the splendid streets and reached our hotel.




CHAPTER X.

BAGNERES DE LUCHON.

The bathing establishment and its surroundings--The lovely
_Allees_--Montauban church and cascade--The Villa Russe and its
genial host--Various excursions--Orphanage of Notre Dame de Rocher--The
Vallee du Lys--The Rue d'Enfer and cascades--A lively scene--The view
from Superbagneres--Loading wood--"The Oxen's Appeal"--Visit to the
Orphanage--A "holy" relic--To Bosost--St. Mamet--"A Stumbling-block"
--Cascade of Sidonie--Horse tricks and jockey dodges--Lizards in
flight--Fashion on a donkey--On the Portillon 'twixt France and
Spain--The Valley of Aran--Snug Bosost--A curious inn--Children with
artistic bent--A bright pathway--Missing much, but thankful still.


The most delightful of weather throughout our stay doubtless added
greatly to our enjoyment of Luchon, and our willingness to agree with
its title as "The Pearl of the Pyrenees "; and, in fact, to all people
but those who love dust, noise, and fashion, this month of May is the
pleasantest time of the year to go, see, and be happy.

The great bathing establishment, situated as it is in a lovely garden
(Quinconces) with a charming lake overhung with the graceful weeping
willows, and under the wooded sides of Superbagneres, seems to invite
one to enter and bathe. When we looked in, very little business was
going on, and one of the attendants, in the hope of receiving a small
coin, was nothing loath to show us round.

It is the largest and most efficiently arranged of all the Pyrenean
establishments, and can accommodate over 200 people at the same time;
"douche" baths, swimming baths, ordinary baths, rooms for inhaling,
rooms for "pulverisation," seemed to succeed one another with unending
rapidity, as we followed our guide down long corridors or up flights of
stairs; and when at last it was all over, and he had quietly and
contentedly pocketed his coin, we felt as though we had been taking
quite a long walk.

[Illustration: "THE 'PEARL' IN THE PEERLESS VALLEY."]

The Allee d'Etigny--the principal street--and all the other
_allees_, notably the Allee des Bains, make most delightful
promenades, even in the heat of the day, so delightful is the shade
afforded by the trees that line the way on either side. To walk from
the "Thermes" along the Allee des Bains, turning into the Casino
gardens, or continuing further--leaving the "Chute de la Pique" on the
right--along the riverside till the road to Montauban cuts it at right
angles, is a most delicious evening stroll. We prolonged this, by
taking the road in question between the poplars up to the village of
Montauban itself; but found more interest in the beautiful new church
than in the waterfall at the back of the village, which is gained by
passing through the good cure's garden, and for which privilege half a
franc is charged. The church, of white stone, very symmetrically built
and of quite a different architecture from the usual French types,
stands out imposingly at the entrance to the village, backed up by the
tree-clad hills and the cottages beyond. The interior is most chaste
and tasteful, as different from the usual Roman Catholic interior as is
the outside from the general exterior, the texts on the pillars near
the entrance being quite an unusual feature. Whether the decoration was
not yet finished, and the tinsel therefore not yet arrived, we could
not learn; but are afraid it is only too probable, as the church, as it
stood, might have been one of our own; for even the gilt pulpit
harmonised so well with the rest, that it did not detract from the
religious and solemn effect, while the light through the
finely-coloured windows threw a softening glimmer over all.

[Illustration: THE CHURCH OF MONTAUBAN.]

We returned by a short cut through the fields on the left and the
garden of the Villa Russe, whose owner, "charmant et gentil," not only
showed us all over, but very kindly invited us to a strawberry feast a
month hence--which sorrowfully we had to decline--as well as making us
free of his garden and fields, the latter being filled with the
sweet-scented narcissus.

The Hotel Canton, in which we were staying, was very conveniently
situated and comfortable. While standing in a quiet part of the Rue
d'Espagne it was close to the post-office and casino on the one hand,
and the bathing establishment and the Jardin des Quinconces on the
other. Moreover, the stables of Jean Sanson--a most excellent guide for
all excursions--were close at hand, and his horses would be difficult
to beat; while his son Luis is experienced in all trips and ascents,
not only in the vicinity, but over a large part of the Pyrenees.

The new casino, barely three years old, is situated in as charming a
quarter as could well be imagined, for besides possessing a finely
laid-out garden with many fine shrubs and trees, it is bounded by three
beautiful _allees_ as well. As previously mentioned, it can be
gained by the Allee des Bains, but the most direct way to the building
itself, from our hotel, was by keeping to the right along the Rue
d'Espagne and the narrow street beyond (the post-office being to the
left), opposite which a side entrance leads to the imposing edifice.

The three most popular excursions from Luchon are those to the Port de
Venasque, the mountain pass at the head of the Pique Valley; the Vallee
du Lys and the Cascades; and thirdly, the ascent of Superbagneres.

The greatest of all, and in truth the greatest in the Pyrenees, is the
ascension of the Pic de Nethou (11,170 ft.), the highest of the range,
and its two great buttresses, the Pics Maladetta (10,867 ft.) and
Milieu (11,044 ft). None but experienced mountaineers, with the most
experienced guides, attempt this ascent, which is attended with much
danger; but there are many other delightful trips in the vicinity,
including a visit to the Spanish village of Bosost; up the Aran valley
to Viella; a drive to the picturesquely-placed St. Beat, or to the old
Roman town of St. Bertrand de Comminges.

Pleasant walks and drives are probably more numerous from Luchon than
from any other Pyrenean resort, and though we were rather too early in
the year for mountain climbing, the fine weather enabled us to enjoy
several other outings, which we will describe in turn.

The Vallee du Lys and the Rue d'Enfer make an agreeable picnic, either
in a carriage as far as the "Cabanes du Lys" (6-1/4 miles), and then
horses for the other 3-3/4 miles up to the abyss, the cascades, and the
Rue d'Enfer, or on horseback all the way. We preferred the latter, and
taking a good lunch in the saddle-bags, made a start at the favoured
hour of ten. Under the lee of the Quinconces, past the Hotel Richelieu,
Villa Richelieu, and the elevated Villa Marguerite, and we were fairly
on our way, the air sweetly laden with the scent from the flower-decked
fields and the lilac-trees in the gardens.

When we passed the little road on the left leading to the Orphanage of
Notre Dame du Rocher, the lilac-scent was very strong; and the position
of the various buildings in connection with the institution seemed so
attractive that we determined to take a stroll there later on. Pursuing
our way, with the restored ruin of the Castelvieil above us on its
"monticule" overlooking the Orphanage, we were soon in a narrower part
of the valley, with the wooded slopes on either side. Then we crossed
the river to the left bank, which we followed until reaching the point
where the road to the Hospice and the Port de Venasque led to the left,
and ours crossed the river by a neat bridge (the Pont de Ravi) to the
right bank again. A little beyond this, the route for Superbagneres
--which we hoped to take another day--struck off among the
trees on the right of the road, which in turn gradually bent in the
same direction all up the beautiful Lys valley, till it again curved in
the opposite direction and arrived at the base of the Cascades, where
there is a fair inn (Auberge du Lys).[Footnote: Only in summer.] From
thence the road forks, but the track to the left is the better of the
two, at any rate if on foot, and by it--after fifteen minutes'
labour--the foot of the Cascade d'Enfer is reached; and the Pont
d'Arrouge in another quarter of an hour. A similar length of time is
still necessary to reach a small tower whence a good view of the
Gouffre d'Enfer and the Pont de Nadie, above it, can be enjoyed. This
tower is about a mile distant from the foot of the lowest fall. The
other cascade (the Cascade du Coeur) is not a very difficult twenty
minutes' walk by a path that leads through the trees to Lac Vert, and
as there is a capital inn there (later in the season), we think that
this would be a good spot for lunch. Even as it was, we managed to
enjoy ours pretty well, for fresh air and sunshine are good appetisers,
and the ride had added its effect besides. The return ride in the
afternoon, when the sun was commencing to decline a little, was very
pleasant, and the snow-covered Port de Venasque, so beautiful in its
whiteness, and yet for the same reason quite inaccessible, looked very
lovely when tinged with the crimson hue that the setting sun shot o'er
it, as we arrived in Luchon again.

[Illustration: THE RUE D'ENFER AND CASCADES.]

The following morning broke beautifully fine, and Luis Sanson was at
the door punctually at seven, with the horses for our trip up to
Superbagneres.

The saddle-bags were again filled, and away we went, the horses--still
so fresh--being eager for a canter in the fresh morning air. In summer
the ascent is usually made by St. Aventin and the Granges de Gouron, in
which case the road towards the Col de Peyresourde is followed as far
as St. Aventin, and thence a way leading to the left; but we were too
early for that route, as an avalanche had only lately fallen, so were
obliged to go and return by the route used in the season for the return
only, viz., by the "Pont de Ravi" up the Vallee de la Pique. Having
reached the bridge and taken the path indicated by the sign-board on
the right, we were soon among the trees, which lent a very welcome
shade from the increasing heat, which even at this early hour (7.40
A.M.) the glorious Sol was not ashamed to diffuse.

At every fresh turn the strokes of the axe rang through the wood,
mingled with the sound of voices, and after making considerable
progress--during which our guide narrated incidents in his career as
hunter, guide, and jockey--we arrived in view of a very lively scene.
Workmen busy with the hatchet, the saw, and the plane, in the
foreground; others in the rear occupied with mortar and stones,
building a small but substantial house; a cart with oxen lazily
waiting, like Mr. Micawber, for "something to turn up"; a few superior
individuals in deep consultation, and the irrepressible sun struggling
through the beeches and pines to have "his finger in the pie"--such was
the scene we saw, but soon left behind. After this the good broad
carriage-road soon came to an end, and the easy gradient changed to a
steep path among a grove of nothing but beeches, which emerged later on
the slope of a somewhat bare and stony hill dotted with a few gentians.
The view improved with nearly every step, growing magnificently vast;
and when at length we reached the summit, or rather a mound a few feet
lower, but equally good as a point of sight (for the summit was covered
with snow), we gazed on as grand an expanse of mountains and
tree-clothed valleys as imagination could picture in the most lofty of
its lofty flights.

[Illustration: ON THE ROAD TO SUPERBAGNERES.]

Probably but few people will be disposed to deny that, considering the
comparatively small amount of labour necessary to attain the summit, it
is more than amply compensated for; and, when the height of
Superbagneres--which is only 5,900 ft.--is taken into account, such a
grand sight is almost unique. For over two-thirds of a circle the chain
of peaks continues, extending from the Cecire of Superbagneres to the
Cecire [Footnote 1: We have only the guide's authority for this name
here.] above Bosost, and even beyond. Beginning with the nearest, the
Cecire (8,025 ft.) of Superbagneres, then come the Pene de Montarque
(9685 ft.), and the cone-shaped Quairat (10,037 ft.), followed by the
huge glacier of Crabioules, which, in spite of its eternal snow,
supplies the various cascades in the Rue d'Enfer that flow into the Lys
valley. Above rise up the Pic de Crabioules (10,233 ft), the Pic de
Bourn (9,875 ft), and the peculiar Tuc de Maupas (10,204 ft.); after
which the Trous d'Enfer and the Pic de Sacroux (8,786 ft) appear. The
next of the near peaks is the Pic de Sauvegarde (9,145 ft), but between
the Sacroux and this, calm and clear, the highest peaks of the range,
the Milieu, the Maladetta, and the Nethou, with the dead white glacier
below them, rise in view. After the Sauvegarde, the Pic de la Mine
(9,048 ft.), the Port de Venasque (7,930 ft.), and the very pointed Pic
de la Pique (7,854 ft.) appear, followed by the Pas de l'Escalette
(7,877 ft.) and the Port de la Picade (8,219 ft.), towards which group
the Vallee de l'Hospice leads.

To the left of the Picade, the cone of the lofty "Posets" may be seen
in the distance, while more to the left, and more distant too, the Pena
Blanca (9222 ft.) is also visible. Further round, over the wooded
"cols" that guard the "Pique" valley, the Mont Segu [Footnote: We have
only the guide's authority for the name.] and Cecire near Bosost, and
the _Pyrenees Orientales_ beyond, finished the magnificent chain.
From another situation we could look down on Luchon and from this point
were endeavouring to reach the little hut, where fodder and a few
provisions can be found in the season, when an ancient shepherd bawled
out in _patois_ that the place was as yet tenantless, for which we
felt thankful to that peasant, as it saved us a long tramp through
rather deep snow, though for that same reason we were unable to reward
his forethought as it deserved. Leaving him to pursue his guileless
way, we descended into the beech grove for our lunch, and finding
grateful shade at the foot of a fine fir, we opened the saddle-bags and
proceeded to regale ourselves, finding some snow that we brought from
the top very useful to cool the rather heated claret. After nature was
satisfied we quickly descended past the previously busy scene, and when
near the high road again came in view of some woodmen loading a cart
with logs. To do this the logs had to be brought to an eminence above
the cart, and bullocks were employed to drag up the wood. The men were
treating them most cruelly, and once or twice they lowed so piteously,
that we have translated it into

"THE OXEN'S APPEAL."

  Working and toiling the whole of the day,
  Working and toiling without any pay,
  Only perchance a few mouthfuls of hay,
    From earliest dawn till late.
  Held by the horns 'neath this cumbersome yoke,
  Firmer fixed thus than a "pig in a poke,"
  Feeling the "prong" and the lengthy stick's stroke,
    Ours, alas, is a terrible fate.

  When straining our utmost, you bring the stick down
  On our miserable backs; and you swear, and you frown,
  Never thinking the sun is just "doing us brown,"
    As the furnace will do when we're slain.
  We cannot pull more than we can, you must know,
  And we cannot pull fast if we can but pull slow,
  So why should you spike us, and ill-use us so,
    And make our hides tingle with pain?

  We serve you well always, draw heaviest loads,
  And never complain of the worst of bad roads;
  While you in return use those blood-drawing goads
    At ev'ry conceivable time.
  Be sure that no quicker or wiser are we,
  But we _do_ sometimes think if we got our horns free,
  The position in which you would probably be,
    And you would not pronounce it sublime.

  So listen, we pray, to our modest appeal:
  With kindness more proud of our work we should feel;
  And if those fierce blows you still ruthlessly deal,
    You'll make our flesh horrible stuff;
  For though steaks are good beaten, that's done when they're cold,
  And we're certainly not, nor as yet very old;
  But as some day we'll have to be butchered and sold,
    We had better be tender than tough.
    If you'll try our plan--that is enough!

At twenty minutes past one we had repassed the graceful Jardin des
Quinconces, with the weeping willows overhanging the lakelet, and were
within the cool precincts of the hotel.

Having a couple of hours to spare another morning, we wended our way
towards the Orphanage, "deep in the lilac grove." Turning off from the
road, we followed the narrow track over the rustic bridge, and were
received anything but hospitably by a huge white dog. We calmed him in
time, however, and proceeded to inspect the buildings, but found nearly
everyone shut up, though the little church--elevated above the
rest--was, unlike them, thrown open. Its very rusticity and simplicity
gave it a religious air which to us so few Roman Catholic edifices seem
to possess. The badly-spelt and feebly-worded address to the Pope, to
which he has affixed his signature, that hangs in a frame near the
door, we did not consider much of an attraction, though to the members
of the little congregation it would doubtless be a very holy relic.
Forsaking this peaceful retreat, we climbed up the ascent behind,
within view of the statue of the Virgin, but soon descended again, as
the sun was at that time particularly "baking," and we were not doughty
enough to pretend to resist it. After a cool spell near the
chapel-door, watching the "painted ladies" [Footnote: Butterflies, of
course!] playing with the lilac blossoms, we trudged slowly back again.

One of the pleasantest as well as most interesting of our trips in the
Pyrenees was from Luchon to the little Spanish village of Bosost, and
as it is one of the principal pillars that uphold the chief title of
this volume, it deserves a detailed mention.

This time the favourite hour of ten was not early enough for starting,
so we were on horseback by 9.15, going very leisurely, being quite
undesirous to force the pace, as the day was warm even at that hour.

Up the Rue d'Espagne for a short distance beyond the Hotel Richelieu
(which hotel, from all we have heard, though large, is not too moderate
nor owned by too polite a proprietor), and then we took the turning to
the left, which (as the signboard tells) leads to St. Mamet. Without
waiting to enter the old church to see its frescoes, we pursued the
road branching off to the right, which presently left the Orphanage
behind in the same direction. A few minutes later we had passed the
frontier (French) custom station, and leaving the isolated Castelvieil
(2514 ft.) for a short time on our right, and later in our rear, we
bore up the Vallee de Burbe. We had only progressed a short distance
when a huge rock was visible in the centre of the road, evidently a
very recent gift from the adjacent height. Our horses having been so
little used, were very fresh and rather fond of shying, and our
guide's, which was an Arab, not only shied at the impediment, but
wheeled round with the intention of going homewards. As we managed to
make our own, however, pass quietly, the obstreperous one, after a
brief struggle, was induced to follow their example. A little further
on, we met a fine team of Spanish mules in their full picturesque
trappings and bells. The two men in charge of them were dressed a
little untidily, but their attire was equally picturesque, the coloured
waistband, turban, and knee-breeches producing a very bright effect.

The bright yellow-green of the beeches, mingling with the dark and
gloomy olive shade of the firs; here and there fields laden with the
blue columbine and the "overrated" asphodel; the boulder-strewn slopes
on our left, and the snow-ridges on the right; and the strong, fresh,
and foaming cascade of Sidonie tumbling down beside us, made a very
delicious contemplation as we went on our way.

Our guide in a most "gallant" manner got off his steed to gather Miss
Blunt a few flowers, but when he endeavoured to assume his former
elevated position, the "Arab" didn't see it. In fact he _would not
be_ mounted, and the unevenness of the track added not a little to
the success of his manoeuvrings. "Luis" had not been six months a
"jockey" for nothing, however; so he lulled his steed into a sense of
security by walking beside it for some time in circus fashion, with his
right hand grasping the off side of the saddle, until a large stone
showed its head at the side of the road. As they passed, he ran up the
stone and was in the saddle before the animal realised that he was
beaten, and when he did, it seemed to humble him to that degree that he
never attempted even a curvet.

The number of lizards we disturbed was something wonderful. None of
them were very large or very striking in colour, but they made up for
this in animation; and their fearful trepidity and hurry to get
anywhere out of sight was wonderful.

Just before entering the sunlit beech glades we overtook a noble
cavalcade, consisting of three ladies on three donkeys, with a fat old
woman leading the way on foot. They had their lunch with them, and
apparently intended--judging by a certain hungry look they had--to make
their repast at the earliest opportunity. The young and beautiful lady
bringing up the rear was probably ignorant of the ludicrous figure she
made with her "ultra" fashionable arrangement of steels, that gave her
the appearance of having a large clothes-bag under her dress, or we
don't think she would have started on the excursion in such a garment.
If a member of the "Rational Dress Society" had seen her, there would
probably have been an "exhibition" on the spot, and a general one--with
all the latest "improvements" (?)--at Luchon a few weeks later.

After traversing a number of beautiful glades we entered the Firs--the
Black Forest as it is called,--where bears are hunted in the winter,
and through which the road ascends by a series of zigzags to the summit
of the Col de Portillon (4275 ft.), and then descends for a short
distance to the frontier, marked by a huge boulder, with the French
flag on one side and the Spanish on the other. As we reined in the
horses opposite to it for a moment, no one could dispute that we were
indeed "'twixt France and Spain." But we did not stay to enjoy this
enviable position long; and passing on, endeavoured to realise that we
were no longer in France by fixing our eyes on the _Pyrenees
Orientales_; we could also see the Poujastou (6332 ft.) on our left,
the Couradilles (6513 ft.), the Mont Segu, the Cecire, [Footnote: We
had only our guide's authority for these names] and further forward the
Entecade on our right. A short distance down the road there lay the
Casino du Portillon, not yet opened for the summer gambling, and not
very much further (viz., about a mile from the frontier), the Spanish
custom-house, and the Casino de Roulette. Here the road divides, the
branch to the Vallee d'Aran and Bosost bearing to the left, and the
other, to Viella and the Artiques-Tellin, in the opposite direction.

Passing some ruined houses and fertile slopes in our descent, we soon
obtained a fine view up both ends of the Aran valley, with the
diminutive Garonne winding through, and Bosost snugly situated on the
slopes of a hill round a bend in the road. The sun was pouring down in
all his midday strength as we passed the roadside chapel of St. Antoine
and entered the antiquated little village of Bosost, stopping at the
Fonda de Espana for lunch.

This inn, from the road, was as much unlike an inn as anything we ever
saw, and its ways and passages were somewhat unique; but upstairs there
was a large room with a wide terrace facing the river, which only
wanted an awning over to be rendered delicious. We were unfortunately
too early in the season for this luxury, so had to content ourselves
with lunching in the room, with wide-opened doors. When the provisions
were spread out, in rushed the guide with an official document, and a
franc to pay for having invaded Spain. We gave him the money, and asked
to taste some honest country wine, which resulted in the domestic
bringing us something rather strong, like new port, which did not go
badly with water.

After the repast had passed pleasantly, we strolled out into the
village, Miss Blunt being equipped with the requisites for a brilliant
sketch. Unhappily, the subject was not easy to find, though we marched
through most of the streets; but having visited the ancient
church--with its chime of bells, like many others in Spain, arranged on
a wheel--we found a spot by the side of a huge elm from which there was
a good view of the sacred edifice. But it was a case of sketching under
difficulties, as the whole or at least the greater part of the village
children crowded round us, some carrying smaller children in their
arms, some playing with flowers, others cutting bits of wood, and one
and all managing to do their utmost to bother poor Miss Blunt. She
accordingly finished the sketch as quickly as possible, and we all
returned to the hotel to keep out of the oppressive heat.

At three o'clock we started homewards, going rather faster than when we
came. Alternate clouds and sunshine overhead, the lights and shadows
over the trees, the fields--radiant with gentians, oxslips, columbine,
_polygaloe_, and asphodel--losing none of their charm.

At the Spanish custom-house we delivered up our passport, for which we
had paid the franc, and then wound over the Portillon and gently back
to our hotel, not arriving too late for the cup that soothes and
cheers, but never cheers too loudly.

The morrow was to see us leaving Luchon--the charming, the
beautiful--and all of us had a similar feeling, viz., that we might
soon come and see the "Pearl of the Pyrenees" again.

It was true that we had missed all the noise and excitement which comes
with the summer; that we had missed the troops of Pau-ites wearing out
such of their "robes" as the heat would allow, and the throngs of gay
Spaniards; that we had missed the crowds of invalids, the bands of
music, and the worst specimens of the travelling world, "French
tourists." But it was a truth for which we were very grateful, and we
would certainly advise future visitors to take Luchon in the spring,
and leave it before the heat and bustle of the season mar its peace,
and the summer's sun melts the snowy splendour of the surrounding
heights.




CHAPTER XI.

ST. BERTRAND DE COMMINGES.

Keeping to old friends--Valley history--Entering the Garonne
valley--The picturesque St. Beat--St. Beat to Viella--Memories of the
lovely Thames--Baths of Ste. Marie--Loures--The cross-roads--Weak
walls--Entering St. Bertrand--An ancient house--The inn--A charming
garden--The cathedral--A national disgrace--"The Crocodile of St.
Bertrand"--The tomb of Hugues de Chatillon--Travelling desecraters--St.
Bertrand's rod--The ruined cloisters--Desolation--Swine
feeding--Montrejeau--The buffet--No milk!--French railway
officials--Trying experiences.


It was not many years ago that travellers with heavy luggage were
forced to travel in the clumsy diligence between Luchon and Montrejeau;
and, especially in the summer when the press for places was great, very
little comfort could be enjoyed during the journey, except perhaps on a
fine day, when for a short space the vehicle stopped at St. Bertrand de
Comminges. Now, the railway in an hour performs the whole distance; but
we preferred to keep to our old friends, a "landau and four horses,"
and with the weather still propitious, left the comfortable Hotel
Canton at our favourite time, and were soon bowling down the Allee
d'Etigny. In a short time the Allee Barcugna and the station were left
behind, and we entered the broader part of the valley of Luchon. This
valley was originally--_on dit_--a huge lake, and afterwards
--presumably when it had ceased to be such--became peopled by a Gallic
race, whose "divinity," Ilixo, [Footnote: Ilixo has now become Luchon.]
has given his name to the surroundings. We presume in this derivation
"consonants are interchangeable and vowels don't count."

Cier de Luchon (four and a quarter miles), above which to the west
stands the Pic d'Antenac (6470 ft), was soon passed through, as we
crossed and recrossed the railway line, now following the River Pique,
and now, for a short space, keeping along the line. Five miles further,
and we left the Pique valley for that of the Garonne, passing through
the village of Cierp, which lies to the right of Marignac, the station
where passengers alight for St. Beat. This is a very picturesque
village, about three miles east, perched above the Garonne in a narrow
defile, possessing an ancient church and a good inn. The Pic de Gar
(5860 ft.), which rears up to the north of the village, is very rich in
flora; and the road passing through it (St Beat) afterwards leads by
the villages of Arlos, Fos, and Les to Bosost (twelve miles), whence it
continues to Viella.

The valley at this point is particularly fertile and lovely, and as we
progressed, frequently following the windings of the Garonne, memories
of pleasant hours, both lively and dreamy, spent on some of the quiet
reaches on the dear old Thames, seemed naturally to recall themselves;
the similarity of the surroundings being in some parts so great.

At Salechan (thirteen miles) the beautiful valleys of Siradan and
Barousse branch off, and the scenery in the vicinity is deliciously
bright and peaceful-looking. The bathing resort of Ste. Marie lies a
mile northwards, and barely a mile to the west of it, on the road to
Mauleon, the baths of Siradan are situated. Mauleon (1960 ft.) is three
and a quarter miles west from Siradan by the village of Cazaril,
standing at the head of the Barousse valley.

Still passing through charming country, we reached Loures (not to be
confounded with Lourdes), at which place--being the railway station for
St. Bertrand--carriages can be hired for the drive, a distance of six
miles there and back. Traversing the village and crossing the bridge,
we issued again on a vista of fields bright with trefoil and waving
flowers, and backed up by finely-wooded hills. Away to the right,
nestling among the trees, stands a pretty little village and castle,
and as we passed on, St. Bertrand came in view over the crest of a
wooded hill; and, arriving at the junction where the roads from Auch,
Toulouse, and Ax join in, we ascended the hill on which this ancient
town is situated.

Founded by Pompey the Great, B.C. 69, Lugdunum Convenarum, or Lyon,
or--as it is now called--St. Bertrand de Comminges, though standing
only 1690 ft. above the sea, seems from its isolated position, to be
much higher; as the accompanying sketch by M. Dore testifies, though
the latter exaggerates the proportions of the cathedral.

Though in a ruinous state, much of the old ramparts and fortifications
remain, while in some parts many of the old stones seemed to us to have
been used for ornamental walls, such as no one would consider fit to
resist even a very modest cannon-ball.

Bearing to the left, we passed beneath the "Porte Cabirole," opposite
to which stands a small kiosque, built, on account of the beauty of the
view, at that point The road continues between high walls underneath
another archway, past the ruins of a curious house, with a winding
staircased tower of the 13th century, which alas! before this appears
in print, will probably have disappeared altogether; then bending to
the left, and again to the right after a few yards, we drew up at the
Cafe (called by courtesy Hotel) de Comminges, with the ancient
cathedral in full view. Having sent a telegram early in the morning, we
found lunch ready for us, and though we had fared better elsewhere, we
did not consider that for a "primitive Roman town" the meal was to be
found fault with while as to the garden belonging to the inn, it was
indeed a charming little spot. Although in truth but little more than a
"spot," the bright and varied hues of its stocks, columbines, pansies,
and sweet peas, with here and there a particularly fine iris,
contrasting so effectively with the dark green of the ivy leaves and
the blackness of the berries clustering over the old wall, gave it a
charm which we could not fail to feel; and the view from the
creeper-grown arbour over the richly-wooded hills and brilliant fields,
with the bright garden as a background, made a scene to remember and
enjoy.

[Illustration: St. Bertrand De Comminges.]

Notre Dame, or Sainte Marie, as the cathedral is called, attracted our
attention most, and though the front view is perfectly spoilt by the
lofty scaffolding erected before it, the inside fully compensates for
this defect, although it is impossible to view the ruinous state of
some portions without great regret.

The English are supposed to be a very lucky people, and at any rate we
have reason to be thankful that we are not a republic, nor as a rule
neglectful of old historical buildings; and the sight of this
magnificent old place, mouldering away with no apparent aid
forthcoming--except such as the liberality of occasional visitors
provides, and that, for such a work, is practically _nil_--did not
provoke any wish to change our nationality. It is not as if the French
said, "We are becoming a Protestant people, and therefore wish to
destroy all signs of our having once followed the faith of Rome;" for
in that case censure would be utterly misplaced; but surely if the
national religion remains Roman Catholic, an ancient and wonderfully
interesting old cathedral like this ought to be suitably preserved.

Having been built at two different periods (viz. the close of the 11th
and the middle of the 14th centuries), the architecture presents two
distinct styles, which in parts, are particularly incongruous. The
organ and pulpit combined, which are on the left of the entrance,
constitute a very handsome work of the "Renaissance" period, and are
most unique. On the opposite side of the building a crocodile--or the
remains of one--hangs from the wall, doubtless brought, as M. Joanne
suggests, from some Egyptian crusade; but the "church" puts a very
different complexion on the subject, as will be seen from the
following, which--with all its faults--will be, we trust, pardoned,
since it issues from the mouth of so badly-treated a reptile as

    "THE CROCODILE OF ST. BERTRAND."

    A crocodile truly, there's no one could doubt,
    On taking a look at my skin:
    It's as dry and as tough as a petrified clout,[1]
    Though, alas! there is nothing within.

    I've been here on this wall for a jolly long time,
    And the "cronies" a legend will tell
    Of the wonderful things, void of reason and rhyme,
    That during my lifetime befell.

    They'll tell you I lived in "this" beautiful vale,
    And found in the river a home;
    While even the bravest would start and turn pale,
    If they chanced in my pathway to roam.

    They'll tell how I swallow'd the babies and lambs,
    And harassed the cows in the mead;
    And such slander completely my character damns,
    While I've no one to help _me_ to plead.

    And they'll whine how I met the great Bertrand himself,
    The miracle-worker and saint.
    But those women will tell any "walkers" for pelf,
    And swear I'm all black--when I ain't.

    Yes! they actually say that St. Bertrand came by,
    And lifted his ivory stick,
    Then dealt me a terrible blow in the eye,
    Which levell'd me flat as a brick.

    But it's false! Just as false
    as that "here" I was
    brought

    On the back of that
    wonderful man.

    But the crones just repeat
    what the "priesthood"
    have taught,

    And it's part of a regular
    plan.

    Why, believe me, they
    caught me afloat on
    the Nile

    As my dinner I just had
    begun;

    I was chased by a host of
    the picked "rank
    and file,"

    And to them my destruction
    seem'd fun.

    And when I was dead they
    anointed my bones,

    And placed me up here
    on the wall;

    But that organ at first was
    so loud in its tones,

    Of rest I found nothing
    at all.

    A crocodile truly. You've
    heard my sad tale,

   And I say that such lies
   are a sin;

   While the protests I make,
   seeming nought to
   avail,

   Are enough to make any
   one thin!

[Footnote 1: This is a Yorkshire word, meaning "cloth."]

[Illustration: THE CROCODILE OF ST. BERTRAND.]

Turning away from this "priestly" monument to St. Bertrand's miraculous
powers, we passed along the side of the remarkable choir stalls--which
take up the greater part of the edifice--and turned inside at an
opening, near the high altar. The latter, decorated with the ordinary
display of 19th century tinsel, does not call for much comment, but in
a passage close behind it stands the mausoleum of St. Bertrand, built
in 1432. The stalls were erected in the 16th century, and are worthy of
much attention.

The rood loft, which is nearest the entrance to the cathedral, is
ornamented with figures of the Apostles and Saints, and the exterior
panels running along both sides, and divided by small choicely-carved
columns, represent a diversity of figures; none, however, seeming to
bear much, if at all, on religion. In the interior, besides the throne,
there is a remarkable "tree of Jesse "--near the first stall on the
right hand--which we thought was well done; but what with the different
figures above each stall, the arabesques uniting them, and the less
minute work under each seat, there was no lack of carving to be seen;
and even if it was not all of the highest order, the general effect was
strikingly good. It is worth noting that the cathedral, owing to some
great error, was built facing north instead of west, and that
consequently the east side is on the left of the entrance. Half-way up
this side is the small chapel of Notre Dame de Pitie, in which the fine
marble tomb of Hugues de Chatillon lies. The sculpture is especially
fine, though the beauty is somewhat marred by names scratched with a
pin or written in pencil, wherever sufficient level space is afforded.
Since English people as a rule are credited with being by far the most
numerous of this class of travelling desecraters, it was at least a
satisfaction to notice that most of the individuals, who had chosen
this objectionable--though probably the only--method of handing their
names down to posterity, were French. This tomb was only erected in the
15th century, although the good bishop died in 1352, the same year in
which the edifice was finished.

Several relics may be seen in the sacristy, and amongst them is the
wonderful ivory rod with which the great St. Bertrand is supposed to
have slain the much-maligned crocodile.

Close to the entrance to the sacristy a door leads into the cloisters,
where the scene of ruin and desolation is painfully evident. In the
portion nearest the church, which is roofed over, several curious
_sarcophagi_ may be seen; the rest is a series of pillars and
arches from which the roof has long vanished. In the photographs (which
may be bought at the inn) there is some appearance of order even in the
midst of the decay, but this was probably carefully effected prior to
the artist's visit; for when we were there the whole space was
overgrown completely with weeds, among which a rose-bush and a few
other flowers struggled to bloom, untended and apparently unthought of.

Passing again through the cathedral, whose windows are well worthy of
mention, we made a detour round the town, and then started for
Montrejeau.

The road does not pass through such charming country as we had seen in
the morning, but at times there are some pleasing little bits. At one
spot, where a grove of trees skirted the way, we noticed a large herd
of swine, watched over by a solitary and silent female, to whom they
appeared to give no trouble, never seeming to stray far.

Going at a fairly fast pace, we only took forty-five minutes to reach
the ancient town of Mons Regalis, now completely modernised into
Montrejeau. The advancing years have not only altered it in name, for,
with the exception of the ruins of a twelfth-century castle, there is
nothing to indicate its mediaeval origin; and as to the old-world look
that is so pleasant to meet with, but now so rare, this town of the
"Royal Mount" has no trace of it. The "buffet" at the station, however,
can be recommended, although the "lacteal fluid," either in its pure or
watered form, is decidedly scarce there. The dinner and coffee are
good, and, like most dinners at the stations (always excepting such
places as Amiens and Tours), moderate, when taken at the table d'hote.

We had plenty of time for a meal before the train destined to carry us
on to Pau was due, but in spite of that, through the boorishness of the
station porters and staff generally, we did not depart without a lively
experience.

It is well known that ladies as a rule are wont to travel with numerous
small parcels, and there was no exception in our party to this rule,
while Mr. Sydney and myself were not without _impedimenta_ as
well. In all, there were about a dozen--to put a familiar figure--too
small or too fragile to share the dangers of the luggage-van. These,
three respective porters promised to bring to the train, but as every
porter broke his word, they remained _in statu quo_. And we may
here remark how noticeable it is, that whereas English porters are
always on the alert to earn a few coppers, their French representatives
will rarely if ever help with anything but the registered luggage
(which of course is in the company's charge), while a higher official,
such as you would never ask in England, will occasionally assist--if
desired to do so with politeness--but only occasionally. It is evident
that the French Government reduce the staff to the narrowest limits,
and do not intend porters to help in transporting any luggage but that
which has been paid for in registration; and on the same principle as
armies are organised in South America, for every "porter" there will be
two or three superintendents.

To resume.--This perfidy of the porters placed us in a very unenviable
position; the train was due to start, the ladies were in the carriage,
but the luggage was in a pile at the other side of the station, and Mr.
Sydney, thinking all was well, had followed the ladies. I was requested
to do likewise, as the train was off; but instead of so doing, launched
such a tirade at the head of every official within reach, that they
kept the train waiting to return it; at last, seeing I was obdurate, at
least half a dozen rushed to the offending pile, collared the various
items, and bore them towards our compartment. As the first instalment
arrived I got up, and the train started. The rest of the laden
officials were ranged a few yards apart, and as our carriage passed,
the packages and cloaks were thrown in. The scene they presented when
the door was first shut was unique, but very deplorable, and it
required the whole of the journey of four and a half _hours_ to
Pau, to calm our troubled minds, cool our heated frames, and make us
look with equanimity on our experience. It would require _years_
to efface the opinion formed on "French railway station" management; so
in that we followed a method often pursued by schoolboys in early life,
over the "Pons asinorum," and gave it up.




CHAPTER XII.

EAUX BONNES AND EAUX CHAUDES.

Carriage _v_. diligence--Early birds--Height of
absurdity--Diminutive donkeys--A whitened region--"Crystal
clear"--Washerwomen and their gamps--A useful town-hall--A halfway
house--Moralising--A much-loved pipe--An historic ruin--A noteworthy
strong box--"Ici on rase"--Where are the bears?--Women in
gaiters--Picturesque costumes--A lovely road--A "perfect" cure--A
spring scene--A billiard-playing priest--A well-placed pavilion--The
Valentin and its cascades--Through solid rock--Gaps in the road--A
grand scene--Wanted, an artist--A fine torrent--Professional
fishers--Lucky guests--Musings--Poor Mr. Tubbins--Bonnes _v_.
Chaudes--Over the Col de Gourzy--Peculiar teams--Guelder
roses--Spinning.


Next year, travellers with luggage will probably be able to reach Eaux
Bonnes in a much shorter time than now, since the railway ought then to
be in working order as far as Laruns; but at the period when this was
written, the only choice of conveyances lay between a clumsy diligence
and a comfortable carriage.

Very few people would be likely to hesitate between the two, provided
they were not travelling alone, and in that case even, they would
probably only take the former as an "experience."

The "diligence" which starts from the Hotel de la Poste at Pau has
three compartments, for a seat in any of which the respective charges
are 8 frs. 80 cents, 7 frs. 70 cents, and 6 frs. 60 cents. The
"first-class" seats--which are of course the best--are placed behind
the driver, and a large dusty-looking hood shields the passengers from
the rain, but not from the dust, nor, since it is black and low, from
the heat of the sun. The position therefore, even with ample
accommodation, is a trying one, but when tightly packed, and wedged in
with luggage to boot, on a warm summer or even spring day, the lot of
an individual during the 5-1/2 hours' journey, with only a half-hour's
break between, would, like the policeman's, be certainly not "a happy
one."

When a party are going it is of course cheaper to take a carriage,
which may be had for from 35 to 50 francs to do the trip in one day, or
at the rate of 25 francs per diem, taking it for two days or more. As
the distance between Pau and either Eaux Bonnes or Eaux Chaudes is
271/2 miles, and the distance of the one watering-place from the other
61/4 miles, the actual mileage from Pau and back again is 611/4 miles,
to perform which in one day, and see the two towns as well, is a
feat--though often done--hardly to be recommended. At least two days
should be given to the task, and we do not think they would be
regretted.

The heat in Val d'Ossau during the summer months is very great, and the
lumbering old diligence usually runs during the hottest part of the
day; we preferred an early start, and by half-past six were on the
road, meeting a few people apparently wending their way towards the
market, with flowers and vegetables for sale. Crossing the bridge and
through Jurancon, where hardly a soul was astir, we sped along the
dusty road to Gan (5 miles), at which town--one of the chief centres of
the wine district--a road to Oloron branches off to the right. Here the
inhabitants were really beginning to bustle; and as it was getting on
towards eight o'clock, they were nothing too early, although they may
have held a different opinion. At the corner of one of the streets we
came upon a team drawing a long cart, which we unanimously christened
the "height of absurdity." A pair of 17-hand horses were in the shafts,
and in front, attached as a leader, was the smallest of donkeys. Miss
Blunt thought it the _smallest donkey in the world_; but we have
met with so many lately in the Pyrenees which were in turn, in her
opinion, the smallest she had ever seen, that by this time the smallest
donkey might be but little bigger than a rat; this, however, was not
the case, as Mr. Sydney will attest.

The valley grew more lovely as we progressed, with the winding Neez
stream running with merry music beside the road, and although Mrs.
Blunt did not indulge--as on the way to Cauterets--in any raptures of
her own, she was quite willing to agree with the rest that the frequent
resemblance of the scenery to many of the lovely bits we have in Wales
was most pleasantly apparent.

Shortly before reaching the blanched region of the lime-works (71/2
miles), we caught a momentary glimpse of the Pic du Midi d'Ossau (9466
ft.), on which the summer sun had of late so relentlessly played, that
the snowy crown had quite disappeared. Rebenac (93/4 miles) was reached
at 8.40, and there we crossed the Neez by a stone bridge, the stream
then running on our right, and continuing thus for three kilometres
farther (11 miles from Pau), when it issues from the Grotto du
Neez--only a few yards from the road. From this grotto a great part of
the torrent is diverted, being utilised to supply Pau with its pure and
sparkling fluid. Half-an-hour after leaving Rebenac we passed through
the village of Sevignac, (123/4 miles), and had a splendid view of the
Val d'Ossau from the bridge which overlooks Arudy, and which is
overlooked in turn by a fine and well-situated house.

We had barely time to appreciate the curious rocks which abound near
Arudy, when we passed the road leading off through that town to Oloron,
and came in sight of a merry group of washerwomen, whose enormous
umbrellas--being unnecessary, since it was perfectly fine--were open in
a row, and with their shades of magenta, green, and blue, without
mentioning sundry patches of other shades, made a wonderful contrast to
the green bushes fringing the river.

At 9.40 we entered Louvie Juzon (16 miles), with its old church and
curious belfry-tower, and its "mairie" turned into a school--for the
nonce at least; and passing the latter, we crossed the fine bridge over
the Gave d'Ossau, on the other side of which the Oloron road leads off
through Izeste to the right, and the courtyard of the Hotel des
Pyrenees bids us enter and rest.

How gladly the occupants of the diligences descend, for the short while
adjudged sufficient, at this customary half-way house, who but
themselves can tell? Even we were glad to let the horses have an hour's
rest, and to enjoy meanwhile some good hot coffee and chicken. The inn
itself was certainly not a paradise; but there were some lovely fields
behind it, and in front, across the road, there was an old table and an
older seat among the trees, down by the swift-flowing river. A charming
place for moralising indeed! None of us, however, were much in the
style of the "melancholy Jacques," or, with our eyes on some vigorous
fisherman higher up the river, we might have begun:

  "And yet it irks us, these bright speckled trout,
  Being native swimmers in this river, should
  From their own limpid pools, by gay, false flies
  Be cruelly decoyed."

Instead of this, however, we returned to the inn, where we saw a worthy
count endeavouring to clean a huge meerschaum pipe that he handled with
evident fondness, and finding our carriage ready--it being then nearly
eleven o'clock--we continued our journey.

It was now that the real Val d'Ossau commenced, and though the drive so
far had been much enjoyed, we soon passed into scenery both more fine
and more wild. One kilometre from Louvie on the left stands the ancient
Chateau de Geloz (161/2 miles) on a small hill, and on another hill
beside it--of corresponding size--stands a church. The view here, with
the village of Castets behind, the beautiful river below, and the
wooded slopes and massive rocks above, was especially charming.

With many lovely fields on either side of us we drove at a smart pace
towards Bielle (181/4 miles), and at a quarter-past eleven entered the
town, which in bygone days was the capital of Ossau. Here the
celebrated Coffre d'Ossau, that contained archives dating from the year
1227, was kept; and it is a noteworthy fact that the presence of the
mayors of three towns, besides that of the President of the Valley
Council, was necessary before this "strong box" could be opened.

There are many old houses and objects of interest, including some
mosaics, to be seen in the town, and among other things that attracted
our attention was a large board, painted in the most modern style, with
a pair of scissors at one side and an open razor at the other, and the
"welcome" information--"Ici on rase" underneath.

The village of Bilheres, situated above Bielle on the slopes of the
hill, is not without interest on account of the richness of its copper
mines, while during the dry season a track leads from it over the Col
de Marie Blanque to the Vallee d'Aspe.

As we continued our journey the frequent puffs of dust alone gave us
any trouble, but they caused us at times to screen our eyes and miss
the view. The valley, now at its widest, with pastures high up on the
hills seemingly as fertile as those beside the river, all bright with
flowers or studded with well-leaved trees, spoke of peace and
prosperity. It would have been hard indeed to imagine a huge and
ferocious bear appearing among such cultivation, although the valley
still retains its ancient name, signifying that it was once the resort
of these animals; but a "dancing bear" is the only specimen of the race
seen about there now.

At half-past eleven we passed through the village of Belesten (20
miles), and a little beyond, when once more among the fields, came in
view of a curious sight. Among the many fields, variously cultivated,
was a square one dotted over with small manure heaps in rows. On the
top of several of the heaps, native aprons (belonging, we presumed, to
girls at work in the vicinity) were neatly placed. Was this a new
fashion of rearing mushrooms, or a native invention for the propagation
of aprons? No one could say, so we have given it up!

Further on we noticed a lovely little village among the trees on the
hillside to the left; our coachman called it Louvie la Haute, and we
have heard no other name, as it is too insignificant to be mentioned in
a guide-book.

One peculiarity of this valley seemed to be the wearing of frilled
gaiters or leggings by the women. They seem to supply the place of
stockings and shoes, being visible from just below the knee, and
descending well over the instep, so as to hide everything but the toes.

It must have been market-day at Laruns (233/4 miles), for when we
arrived there at noon the streets were so full of carts and people that
it was a matter of difficulty to get past. If the extra bustle had
betokened one of the fetes, of which the chief is held on August 15th
annually, we should have been far from disposed to grumble, since it is
at these Laruns fetes alone now that the old picturesque Ossalois
costumes can be seen. M. Dore has depicted a few natives in these
costumes at their devotions in the ancient church that stood beside the
route; but no one is likely to do so again, as the edifice--when we
passed it--was falling into ruins and looked in a deplorable condition,
the finely-sculptured doorway being partly hidden by the fallen debris.
But not only the church, but more or less the whole village, seemed in
a tumble-down condition, and this appeared to us especially strange, as
everywhere around prosperity seemed to reign; and further, since the
railway from Pau, which was to be opened this year, appeared nearly
completed, the fact of Laruns being the terminus at this end of the
valley ought to render it yet more prosperous.

Just inside the village we crossed the bridge over the almost dry bed
of the Arricuze (beyond which the old road to Eaux Chaudes branches off
to the right), and then traversing the Gave d'Ossau, we continued under
the trees along the ancient route to Eaux Bonnes. But not for many
minutes, for, where the old road which leads to the Bear Grotto also
begins to ascend, the new route strikes up to the right, and continues
with an easy gradient to the point where it forks (24 miles), the
continuation to the right leading to Eaux Chaudes, and the branch to
the left--which we followed--to Eaux Bonnes.

[Illustration]

No pains have been spared to render the remainder of the journey
attractive to either the rider or the pedestrian, and to us the drive
up the broad zigzags, planted with plane trees, silver beech, ash,
polonia, aspen, arbutus, burberis, and innumerable other handsome trees
and shrubs, was a pleasant one indeed. One rocky bit on the right of
the way, completely overhung with beautiful ivy, seemed to us
especially picturesque. Admiring thus all the poetic touches in form or
colouring as we passed, we suddenly, and almost without warning, found
ourselves entering Eaux Bonnes (271/2 miles), and but a very few
moments more sufficed for our conveyance to the excellent Hotel de
France, where the hostess was ready to receive us.

It would, indeed, be hard to find a more charmingly compact little town
than Eaux Bonnes, anywhere: a perfect little miniature, very happily
situated and beautifully clean and neat. What more could an invalid
desire? Why, the very beauty of the surroundings ought to act
perceptibly on the constitution, and when baths and perpetual tumblers
of the rotten-egg fluid are indulged in besides, a perfect cure
_must_ be guaranteed.

It requires but few words to describe the shape and appearance of the
place, but to convey an _accurate_ idea to the reader is, we are
afraid, a very difficult matter. The town is triangular in
shape--almost an isosceles triangle, in fact--and this triangle is
formed by the shape of the gorge, whose rocky, tree-clothed sides
overlook it. Fine rows of hotels and restaurants, and other
buildings--mostly let as furnished apartments--form the outer edge of
the triangle. A good road separates these from the Jardin Darralde,
which is likewise triangular, and planted with trees and shrubs in the
most agreeable manner, both for neatness and shade. In the centre is
the band-stand, and a bed of roses surrounds it. This is a general
description, but it does not speak of beauty, and we thought that Eaux
Bonnes was undoubtedly a beautiful place.

Suppose a triangular slice were cut out of Hyde Park, combining some
leafy trees and a pleasant flower-bed with a band-stand added, and
hotels and restaurants were erected around it; then, that it were
transported to a narrow part of the Llanberis Pass under the very frown
of Snowdon; and snow should fall on the surrounding summits; and
magnificent beech groves and cascades appear down the wild slopes
below, some idea of what Eaux Bonnes is like might be gained; but even
then it would be little more than an idea.

It certainly has not the grandeur of Cauterets, the freedom of St.
Sauveur, or the expansive loveliness of Luchon. It is hemmed in by the
surrounding heights, of which, at the head of the Sourde (or Soude)
valley (in which it lies) the magnificent Pic de Ger is most
conspicuous, and doubtless this renders it a "warm retreat" in summer;
but to see it as we saw it, with the sun shining on the rain-spangled
leaves of the trees in the Jardin Darralde, on the lighter green of the
beeches above, and glinting through the foam of the "Valentin"
cascades; with no invalids, no gallant French horsemen, no
gaily-dressed women, but only a few peasants dotted here and there, at
work, to give life to the scene--to see it, in short, as it is in
spring, can only give rise to pleasant feelings, which would mellow
into pleasanter and more appreciative memories!

The amount of rain we had during our stay was only sufficient to cool
the heated atmosphere and lay the dust; but Eaux Bonnes has rather a
watery reputation, and many are the times that the visitors become
victims to a shower, returning from their "constitutional" or their
visit to the baths.

When we arrived the hotel had only been open a very short time, as the
"season" was far from beginning, and the only other occupants, as
visitors, were a rather stout man and a fat, jovial-visaged priest. We
discovered them in the billiard-room as the priest was just in the
throes of a most simple cannon, and our entrance appeared to damage his
play, while his face rather lengthened, as though he felt ashamed at
having been surprised at a worldly game. This may have been our fancy,
as he was certainly the first R.C. priest we had seen with a cue in his
hand; perhaps, however, he will not be the last.

After this we lunched, and after that, left the hotel and walked up the
main road towards the Sourde Gorge, passing a choice marble shop, the
bathing establishment, the church, and the town-hall. Beyond this
last-named building the gorge narrows and extends to the base of the
Pic de Ger (8571 ft.). Leaving this on our right, we followed the
Promenade de l'Imperatrice, that ascends above the town-hall, till the
path leading to the little kiosque--built on the summit of a rocky
eminence called the "Butte du Tresor"--branched off to the right.

The view from the little pavilion is indeed a gratifying one, for
though not extended, it is so entirely choice and picturesque; while
the name of the eminence on which it stands, and from which some of the
healing springs are said to rise, is decidedly appropriate, since there
can be no doubt that they have proved a "mine of wealth" to several,
although, as M. Taine remarks, it is "grotesque that a little hot water
should have caused the introduction of civilised cooking in its very
cauldrons."

Descending from the kiosque, we continued along the Route de
l'Imperatrice, over which the beeches and other trees made a pleasant
shade. This is a special walk for invalids, as it is constructed in
zigzags of the easiest gradient, and while being both sheltered from
west winds and open to the sun, it also commands at various points a
good view of the River Valentin, the lower or Discoo Cascade, and the
bridge which spans it; as well as the Route Thermale to Argeles, which
follows the right bank of the river.

[Illustration: CASCADE DU VALENTIN.]

Most of the numerous cascades in the neighbourhood--thanks to the
engineering of the "Empress's Walk" and the road to Argeles--are in
easy walking distance for most people, even invalids; those usually
visited being the Cascade des Eaux Bonnes, de Discoo, du Gros-Hetre and
du Serpent; the Cascade de Larsessec (33/4 miles) requires some fatigue
to reach.

The road leading from the river back to the Hotel de France passes
between two walls of rock against which the houses are built. This
passage has been made by blasting the solid rock, and it seemed that
the work had been one of no small difficulty.

All great excursions were denied us, as neither the Pic de Ger nor the
fatiguing Pic de Gabizos were sufficiently free from snow; while the
road to Argeles still remained broken down in three places, and it
seemed as though July would disappear ere the terrible gaps made by the
avalanches could be built up anew.

We started for Eaux Chaudes in the cool of the afternoon, anticipating
a pleasant drive, and were very far from being disappointed. After
retraversing the road to the branching point above Laruns--near which
the fields and banks were rich in gentians, violets, scabii,
_linariae_, and columbines--we seemed suddenly to plunge into the
Gorge de Hourat. There can be little doubt that there is no truer
specimen of a gorge in the Pyrenees than this. The piled-up crags
overgrown with heather, and the splendid pastures above on the
hill-tops, seen in the Cauterets Gorge, were missing; so, too, the
varied tints and softer landscape bits of the St. Sauveur defile were
absent; but here the masses of rock rose straight up on either side, at
times seemingly ambitious to hide their summits in the clouds; while
the roar of the torrent issuing from the Hourat (or Trou, _i.e._
hole) above which the road passes, only served to heighten the grand
effect of the scene.

Just after the narrowest part is passed, a small chapel may be noticed
high above the river on the right. It marks the scene of a frightful
accident. The old road, which was in use till 1849, passed by the spot,
and a heavily-laden diligence full of passengers overturned--through
the horses taking fright, it is said--and the whole complement were
dashed over the rocks into the torrent below. The chapel has since been
erected, but though the old road still exists, and, in fact, joins the
new one at the Pont Crabe--which beautiful place is admirably depicted
in the sketch--there is little danger of such an accident occurring
again.

A little further on--viz. about two miles from Eaux Chaudes--we noticed
below us as charming a subject as any painter could wish for. A small
plot of velvet-like green-sward beside the rushing river; some trees,
leafy almost to extravagance, gracefully arched above; a few sheep
descending a narrow track on the hillside; and above all, the immense
rocky heights, around the base of which beeches and other trees
luxuriantly grew, and many beautiful flowers bloomed; and, thus
garlanded at their base, their stern and massive summits looked grander
still, and completed such a picture of majestic beauty as no lover of
nature could fail to enthusiastically admire.

One mile further there is another fine sight, though not of the
comprehensive beauty of that just mentioned. This one doubtless is not
worth seeing in mid-summer, when the sun has dried up the mountain
streams, but when _we_ passed that way we could see from the very
summit of the hill--above which the pointed Pic de Laruns reared its
crest--a mass of foam issuing from between two rocks, no puny
meandering streamlet, but a strong torrent, which, as it dashed from
rock to rock, gathered strength and velocity till it rushed amid a
cloud of spray into the river below.

[Illustration: CRABE BRIDGE, IN THE EAUX CHAUDES GORGE.]

We saw one or two gentlemen--evidently early visitors like
ourselves--anxiously whipping the river for fish, but they caught
nothing; in fact, they told us afterwards that it was done with hardly
any hopes of catching, since the "professional"--save the name--element
came out with rods and nets, so that if the rods didn't answer they
could net the pools instead. It seemed to us a remarkably good thing
that "professionals" can't do the same in England!

There is another lovely scene not half a mile away from the town, where
a path leads from the road to the riverside. There is a plot of
green-sward here, and a grove of trees; and the river passes under a
bridge, that vibrates with the force of the torrent surging against its
rocky base. The path over the bridge leads through the leafy glades on
the heights that overlook the river, and the town may be regained by
crossing another bridge higher up.

Soon after, we were entering Eaux Chaudes (271/2 miles), and having
passed the Hotel de France on the left, and the gardens and bathing
establishment on the right, we drove up to the Hotel Baudot and were
courteously received by Madame.

It appeared that we had arrived a day too late, as the marriage of
Madame's niece with the hotel _chef_ had been celebrated the day
before, and wonderful festivities had taken place in their honour;
while the guests in the hotel (fortunately not more than eight in
number) had been regaled with champagne and many choice dishes.

While waiting for dinner we strolled about on the terrace, opening out
of the dining-room and overlooking the river. It did not need the boxes
of bright flowers that lined the terrace sides to entice us there, but
they certainly added to the delightful picture of river and trees; and
as one face reminds us of another, so this scene carried our memory
back to another, but a more lovely one even, because the beauty of the
trees was heightened by large bushes of azaleas--bright with
various-coloured blooms--growing between. But beauty and comfort do not
always go together, and for calm enjoyment this Pyrenean scene had the
preference; for the other was in the heart of Japan, at the tiny
village of Sakurazawa, and we gazed on the picture through the open
_shoji_, [Footnote: Sliding screens, being frames of wood pasted
over with paper, acting as doors and windows.] lying on the neat but
hard--very hard--mats, that were our tables, chairs, and beds in one;
which our host's assurance, that the Mikado himself had slept upon them
the year previous, didn't make any softer. The announcement of dinner
cut short further musings, and we took our places at the table,
profusely adorned with evidences of the previous day's ceremony.

At a table-d'hote of eight or ten people conversation is as a rule easy
and general. It requires a so-called "typical Englishman" to keep
himself within himself, in a shroud of pride and reserve, and the
"typical Englishman" is, thank goodness, nearly out of date. We were
very anxious to learn about the plateau above Gabas. Was this plateau
really worth seeing; and if so, when was it best to start? Everybody
was ready to give their version of the trip, but Mr. and Mrs. Tubbins
(if we recollect rightly) seemed the most anxious to speak. Mrs. T. was
simply a combination of bolsters which shook with the exertion of
speech, while poor Mr. T., a meek, thin, haggard-looking man--and no
wonder--seemed to be ready to put in a word if required, but looked in
momentary terror of getting a snub instead.

This look was not an unnecessary one; for Mrs. T., with all her anxiety
to give information, did not get on very fast, and made many mistakes
in names, &c., which her worse-half tried to rectify, with the result
that she turned on him with "Frank, I wish you wouldn't interrupt; you
are quite wrong, you know!"

However, from the general company we managed to gather a good deal of
information, which, as a cloudy day spoilt our own trip thither on the
morrow, it may be expedient to repeat. Gabas is only a hamlet of a few
houses, and is in itself uninteresting. Situated five miles from Eaux
Chaudes, it is reached by a good carriage road, which, crossing the
Pont d'Enfer, continues along the left bank of the river the rest of
the way, the views being chiefly of granite summits and thick pine
forests. But though Gabas makes an excellent resting-place or
starting-point for several excursions, no one stays there for any other
reason, and tourists from Eaux Chaudes usually pass it on the way to
the Plateau des Bious-Artigues or to Panticosa. The road forks at
Gabas, and becomes no longer anything but a bridle path, the right
branch leading to the plateau, the other passing by the Broussette
valley, across the Spanish frontier, to Panticosa. The plateau is
reached in one hour and a half, not without exertion, and the view over
the Pic du Midi d'Ossau is considered wonderfully fine. Several of our
informants, however, had chosen bad days, and after all their labour,
found a thick mist over everything that was worth seeing. Among these
Mrs. Tubbins had figured, and her goodman had suffered in consequence.
"The idea," she said, "of bringing me all this way, and at my time of
life too, simply to see a mist, as if I hadn't seen plenty of them at
home!" Of course she had come of her own accord, and the meek and
injured one had followed as a matter of course.

[Illustration: THE BIOUS-ARTIGUES.]

The journey from Gabas to Panticosa requires a good twelve hours, and
generally more; consequently an early start is advisable. It is a
favourite way of entering Spain, and much more practicable than the
route from Cauterets to the same spot.

Of Eaux Chaudes itself there is but little to say, for with the
exception of the hotels, the bathing establishment, and a few shops,
there is nothing to form a town. Like Eaux Bonnes it is shut in by the
mountains on either side, but it is more oblong in shape, with two
parallel streets. The Promenade du Henri IV., which leads southwards
from the Hotel Baudot along the side of the river, is a cool and
pleasant walk, especially of an evening.

Various opinions exist as to which place is most suitable for a
residence, the "Bonnes" or the "Chaudes." In spring probably the
former, but the latter certainly in summer; for not only is it free
from the bustling, gaily-dressed crowd which throngs its rival, but
there is a fresh breeze that blows up the valley which renders it
always cool and pleasant; while the scenery is as fine as the most
fastidious could wish for.

The Col de Gourzy and the lofty Pic of the same name tower above Eaux
Chaudes, and a route to Eaux Bonnes--which to good pedestrians is well
worth the exertion--passes over the former. The path strikes off from
the Gabas road to the left, while yet in the town, and passes by the
Minvieille "buvette." For the first half-hour the route is the same as
that to the Eaux Chaudes grotto; this is an excursion, of two hours
there and back, that is in great favour with tourists. Where the path
forks, the one to the grotto is left on the right, and after some
fatiguing work the Plateau de Gourzy is reached, from which the view on
a fine day is splendid. The track then leads through beech glades and
box thickets to the "Fontaine de Lagas" (near which a wild and
beautiful valley branches off to the right), and finally joins the
Promenade Jacqueminot at Eaux Bonnes. Horses may be taken the whole
distance, but it is easier for them--if tourists choose this
highly-recommended route--when the start is made from Eaux Bonnes.

It rained severely early on the morning of our departure, but later,
cleared up into a lovely day, enabling us to start at 8.30. The river
and the cascades were full, and the sun glinting on the wet leaves gave
a fairy-like appearance to this magnificent gorge. As we looked back
from the cascade, which seemed to tumble from the summit of the Pic de
Laruns, the clouds gradually rising over the head of the valley
disclosed a huge snow mountain [Footnote: The "cocher" called it the
Pic d'Estremere, but we had no confirmation of this] to view, that
appeared to form an impassable barrier 'twixt France and Spain.

When we reached Laruns we had a fine view of its pointed peak, and
through the morning haze the lofty Pic de Ger over Eaux Bonnes looked
imposing indeed. Travelling we found very pleasant. There was no dust,
the air was cool, the roads just soft enough for comfort, and the whole
valley refreshed with the morning's rain. The people in the fields
worked with greater energy, and the bright scarlet hoods of the
damsels, many of whom followed the plough, gave a pleasant colouring to
an animated scene. We passed several flocks of geese, apparently
unwilling to proceed at as rapid a pace as the good woman--with her
frilled gaiters--who was in charge of them wished; but with those
exceptions we hardly met anybody or anything on the road till we had
passed Louvie.

What we then met were a couple of carts filled with coal, and as we
never recollected having seen any such peculiar teams as they were
drawn by, we concluded they were "Ossalois," and "peculiar" to the
valley. There were eight animals to each cart, four bulls and four
horses. The bulls were harnessed in pairs (as in a four-in-hand coach),
and acted as wheelers, while the horses, acting as leaders, were
harnessed in line, one in front of another. Curious as this arrangement
seemed, they made good progress with a very heavy load!

[Illustration: THE PIC DE GER.]

At Sevignac a splendid Guelder rose-tree grew in a small garden over a
mill stream, and a very ancient dame very willingly sold us some
clusters which were peculiarly fine; in another garden a very fine bush
of white _cistus_ was completely covered with blooms. The
hedgerows, too, were bright with flowers; the wild Guelder roses and
medlars [Footnote: The "makilahs," or slicks peculiar to the Basque
people, are made from the wild medlar. They are very heavy, tipped with
iron, and unpleasant to carry.] preponderating, but elder bushes were
also plentiful, and covered with blossoms.

At Rebenac we stopped at the Hotel du Perigord for coffee and a fifteen
minutes' rest, the horses not requiring any more, as the day was so
cool. While drinking the "welcome liquid" we watched an old woman out
of the window, spinning. Her distaff was apparently very old and dirty,
and as she span she seemed to be crooning some ancient ditty to
herself, thinking, maybe, of her children and grandchildren, or even of
the days when she was herself a child.

We started again when the quarter of an hour was up, and bowled along
towards Gan, meeting on the way several natives (men) with their hair
in long pigtails, like Chinamen; they looked otherwise decidedly
_Bearnais_, but their appearance was peculiar, to say the least of
it. Beyond Gan we passed into full view of the lovely Coteaux, which
afford such pleasant rides and drives from Pau, and as we gradually
neared the town, the heat seemed to intensify to anything but a
pleasurable degree.

Four hours forty minutes after starting we were once more under the
roof of Maison Colbert, with such a luncheon before us as fully
justified the hospitable repute that it has always borne.

But Pau was far too hot for us to remain for more than a few days,
although the heat was unusually great for that time of the year, and we
were very glad when once more on our journey towards the pleasant
breezes and blue waters of the Biscay.




CHAPTER XIII.

BIARRITZ.

A warm ride--Bayonne--A "Noah's ark" landscape--Amusements
--Bathing--Shells--Cavillers--A canine feat--The pier and rocks--A
restless sea--"The Three Cormorants"--Dragon's-mouth Rock--To the
lighthouse--Maiden-hair ferns--Mrs. Blunt's adventure--The drive round
the lakes--_Osmunda regalis_ ferns--The pine-woods near the
bar--St. Etienne and the Guards' cemetery--Croix de Mouguere--Cambo and
the Pas de Roland--Anemones--A fat couple--A French scholar
--Hendaye--Fuenterabia--A quaint old-world town--The Bidassoa
--Pasages--San Sebastien--The Citadol and graves--The "Silent
Sisters"--Raised prices--Parasols and spectacles.


The journey to Biarritz began comfortably enough, but after the first
few miles the heat became very oppressive, and though we had no
repetition of our Montrejeau experience at starting, we felt
nevertheless almost as warm as if we had.

Our arrival at Bayonne was a great relief, for the sun had partially
retired, and as we crossed in turn the Adour and the Nive, a scent of
the "briny" was borne into our omnibus with revivifying effect. Passing
up one of the narrow old streets to execute a few commissions, we
regained the "Place," crossed the drawbridge, and entered the lovely
avenues, from which, beyond the "fosse," the twin towers of the
beautiful cathedral come into view. On the right is the station of the
"steam tram-line," and some hundred yards beyond it the road to
Biarritz curves in the same direction.

This road cannot be called beautiful! The never-ending line of poplars
along each side turn the landscape into that Noah's ark style which
even the soul that could be "contented with a tulip or lily" would
hardly admire. Approaching Biarritz, however, the handsome villas and
their gardens fully deserve the epithet which cannot in justice be
applied to the road. They are indeed beautiful; and to pass them even
in winter, with the camellia trees laden with blossoms and the roses
scenting the air, makes comparison with our London gardens very odious
indeed!

Under the small-gauge railway-bridge, and past the new "English Club,"
we soon entered the town, [Footnote: The distance between Bayonne and
Biarritz is 5 miles.] and driving down the Rue Mazagran into the Place
Sainte Eugenie, drew up at the familiar Hotel de Paris, in time for
dinner.

Although Biarritz is in the department of the Basses-Pyrenees, it is so
far away from the mountains that many might consider its introduction
into this volume as questionable; we do not therefore intend to say as
much as could be said about it. At the same time, it is so greatly
recommended by doctors as a beneficial spot for a final "brace up"
before returning to England, after a mountain trip, and is, besides,
such a favourite winter residence, that we consider it would be more
"questionable" to omit it.

Unlike Pau, its amusements are not of a very varied character. In
winter, lawn-tennis and balls are the chief, and concerts occur
generally weekly or bi-weekly. As spring asserts herself, bathing
commences and picnics become the fashion; and in the early summer--as
long as the English remain--tennis and bathing go almost hand-in-hand.

The tennis-ground--which is only a short distance from the English
church of St. Andrew's--is well laid out and commodious, possessing an
excellent reading room for members' use, as well. Of bathing
establishments there are three; the large building in the Moorish style
on the Plage, the less pretentious but more picturesque one in the Port
Vieux, and the least pretentious and least protected one, under the
"falaises" [Footnote: Blue chalk cliffs.] beyond.

The first and last are only used in the height of summer; that in the
Port Vieux--from its sheltered position--opens its box-doors as soon as
winter really gives place to spring. The scene, when the tide is high
on a morning in June, is often an exceedingly pretty one, for to the
pristine picturesqueness of the surroundings is added those touches of
human nature enjoying itself, which, if it doesn't "make us kin," goes
a long way towards it.

The "Port Vieux" is triangular in shape, with the apex inland, along
the sides of which the boxes are erected, reaching to the water's edge
at high tide. In the middle lies an expanse of deep sand, and the blue
waters roll in between the rocks and gently break on a shingly beach,
where the tiniest shells and pebbles mingle to make the one drop of
bitterness in the bather's cup.

When the sandy expanse is crowded with merry children, the roads and
seats above filled with spectators, and the water with members of both
sexes in varied costumes and "headgears"--not forgetting the boatman in
the tiny skiff who is here, there, and everywhere in case he is
needed--the scene is a very pleasant one to look upon. Of course there
are always some narrow-minded individuals to find fault, some "maiden"
aunts "with spinster written on their brows," who will put up their
gold-rimmed glasses with that peculiar sniff that invariably prefaces
some _extra sweet_ remarks, such as, "Dear me, how wicked! Men and
women bathing together in that barefaced manner; and ... I do believe
there's that forward Miss Dimplechin actually taking hold of Captain
Smith's hand, and he a married man too! Thank goodness, I never did
such a thing--never!" [Footnote: Did she ever have the chance?]

Above the Port Vieux, on the left, stands Cape Atalaya, with the ruins
of an ancient tower, and a flagstaff on its summit. A road leads round
its base, passing between a circular mound overlooking the "old
harbour," and the yard where the concrete blocks are fashioned for the
strengthening of the pier.

There are seats on this mound, whence people can watch the bathing; and
we often saw a remarkable feat performed from it as well. A race of
wonderful water-dogs--said to be a cross between the Newfoundland and
the French poodle--is bred at St. Jean de Luz, eight miles from
Biarritz. One of their uses is to drive the fish into the nets, and for
this purpose one is taken in every boat that puts to sea. The method is
extremely simple. As soon as the net surrounds a shoal, the dog is put
in the centre, and by beating the water with his paws he effectually
drives the finny creatures into the meshes. It was one of this same
species of dogs that attracted so much attention at the Port Vieux by
leaping after a stick from the mound--a distance of some fifty
feet--into the sea. He would do it as often as his master would let
him, and appeared to enjoy it immensely, though he always reached the
water before the stick, and had then to turn round and hunt for it.

The road, after skirting one side of the yard, crosses the trackway
that runs down the pier and doubles up the other side, through the
tunnel and past the Port aux Pecheurs, into the Place Ste. Eugenie;
whence, continuing by the base of the Hotel d'Angleterre and the
casino, it extends to the bathing establishment on the Plage. In the
other direction it rounds the Port Vieux, and leads under the cliffs to
the other resort of summer bathers; consequently, it might be
appropriately termed the "Chemin des Bains."

The pier is a very favourite resort, and many a fierce fight with the
waves is enacted at its extremity, in which, alas! the sea has always
proved the stronger. As a rule, visitors are not permitted to pass the
"Cucurlon" rock, on which the Virgin's statue stands; but if the
weather is very fine, the gate is opened to admit of any who are so
minded going to the end. On a wild day, with a high wind blowing
inland, the "battle of the waves" is a fine sight, especially from the
platform erected below the flagstaff on Cape Atalaya. Thence the full
beauty of the huge billows, dashing into clouds of spray against the
pier, and, unallayed, pursuing their course with relentless energy till
they boom amid the hollow caverns of the hill, may be admired and
wondered at.

There are two rocks which (as one looks seaward) rise up to the left of
the pier, and serve to break in some measure the force of the waves.
The larger of these in calm weather is frequented by cormorants, and
has gained the name of "Cormorant Rock." There were three of these
birds on it one very rough day, and we saw a scene enacted which--with
due apologies to the late Rev. Charles Kingsley for thus adapting his
pathetic verses--we have commemorated in the following lines, under the
title of

"THE THREE CORMORANTS."

  Three cormorant dandies were perch'd on a rock,
  Were perch'd on a rock as the waves dash'd high;
  Each thought himself equal to any black cock,
  And proudly determined the sea to defy.
  For cormorants fish, and cormorants catch,
  And they swallow their prey with the utmost despatch,
  Without all the trouble of boning!

  Three cormorant damsels were waiting at home,
  Were waiting at home for the dandies so dear.
  "Oh, say! are they fishing where fierce billows foam?"
  And the damsels sat chattering their bills with fear!
  For cormorant maidens _can fish_ and _can catch_,
  And each one considered she'd made a good match.
  And now for her dandy was moaning.

  Three cormorant dandies were washed off the rock,
  Were washed off the rock by a powerful wave;
  And, quite unprepared for the terrible shock,
  They sank in the depths of a watery grave.
  For cormorants fish, and cormorants catch,
  But if waves dash high they should use despatch,
  Or their loved ones will always be groaning!

There are some curious rocks in front of the new harbour, notably the
"Dragon's-mouth Rock," through which on a rough day the water
continuously pours; more to the right, between this and the "Plage," is
a curious group known as the "Chinaougue." [Footnote: Have never found
any one able to account for this title, which is more barbaric than
pronounceable.] A bridge communicates with the largest, on which
"petticoat daffodils" grow, and the couples that may occasionally be
seen going over there _doubtless_ do so to gather these. Beyond
the Port Vieux and underneath the Villa Belzar other curious formations
may be seen, to which an iron gate at the head of a few damaged steps
gives access.

At Biarritz itself there is really nothing to be seen except the sea.
And yet this sea is so beautiful in its varied moods, that a lover of
nature can watch it day after day for any reasonable period, without a
feeling of _ennui_ or a wish for anything more lovely!

[Illustration: THE ROCKS OF BIARRITZ.]

There are many pleasant walks and drives around, but most of them
require a whole day, and are more preferable as a drive than as a walk.
The shortest is to the lighthouse and back, and this is only a very
easy promenade, taking about an hour; so we will deal with it first,
leaving the longer ones to await their turn.

We started one afternoon when the sky was cloudless and the coastline
very clear, hoping to obtain a good view of the Spanish coast, and a
few specimens of maiden-hair fern, if fortune were favourable. We
traversed half the town, when Mrs. Blunt suddenly came to a halt
opposite the Hotel de France, and pointed to a three-wheeled vehicle of
the bath-chair type, to which a weird and very ancient-looking steed
was attached. "I think," said she, "that would be more comfortable for
me than walking; please inquire if it is on hire." So we applied to a
fat dame, who was busily knitting hard by, and having arranged terms,
Mrs. Blunt got in and we continued our way.

Down past the bank and at an easy pace to what was once the Villa
Eugenie, [Footnote: This building, where Emperor and Empress lived at
different times, now belongs to a company under the title of the
"Palais Biarritz," and is employed as a casino and restaurant. "Sic
transit gloria imperatorum."] and continuing up the hill at the same
speed, we gradually drew near the lighthouse, and when once the Villa
Noailles was left behind and the level road reached again, we were soon
at our destination. [Footnote: At low tide there is a way to the
lighthouse along the beach in front of the Palais Biarritz, and up a
steep path over the rocks. The other is much the better way, however,
at all times.] The view of the coast to St. Jean de Luz, San Sebastien,
and almost to Santander, was peculiarly good, as well as that on the
other side in the direction of Bayonne; and while Mrs. Blunt remained
in contemplation from her vehicle, we descended to view the rocks and
caves below.

As a rule it is unwise to disclose where botanical treasures grow, as
they generally become extinct soon afterwards, from excess of
admiration on the part of collectors; but the maiden-hair ferns, for
which the lighthouse rocks are known, can take very fair care of
themselves, as they grow in such awkward positions--we might say
dangerous--that only a few real enthusiasts, or an anxious collector
with a _steady head_, are likely to venture to attack their
strongholds.

[Illustration: VILLA EUGENIE.]

We saw many specimens in the interstices of the rocks surrounding a
moss-grown pool, but they were quite unapproachable. One clump above we
did manage to reach and bear away a few roots of, in triumph; but at
one time there was only two inches of stone for the foot to rest on,
with sheer rocks below; and consequently, without a rope, the
experiment would hardly be worth repetition. However, without mishap we
started on our return journey, and all went smoothly till the Villa
Noailles was again reached; but at this point we suddenly noticed that
Mrs. Blunt was rapidly out-distancing us. Whether the ancient steed
dreamt of its former youth and activity, and "grew young once more," or
whether its long rest had made it anxious to reach its stable, we know
not; but the unpleasant reality was forced upon us, that it was rapidly
bearing Mrs. Blunt away. Miss Blunt had been walking near the vehicle,
Mr. Sydney and rather behind; but as Miss Blunt started to run, we
rapidly followed, and overtook the steed, which, having by that time
pulled up at the bottom of the hill, appeared to be anxious to turn
round and have a look at Mrs. Blunt. As it neighed at the same time,
perhaps it was asking, "Who's my driver?" but this was mere conjecture
on our part, although we were not sorry to restore the animal to the
fat old lady--still knitting--and escort Mrs. Blunt back to the hotel,
none the worse for her little adventure!

[Illustration: SCENE I.--BEFORE THE START.]

[Illustration: SCENE 2.--THE ANCIENT STEED GREW YOUNG ONCE MORE.]

[Illustration: SCENE 3.--WHO'S MY DRIVER?]

The favourite of the short drives is known as the "Tour des Lacs." It
embraces the prettiest country in the vicinity, and the whole distance
is about six miles. We found it most pleasant to start, after lunch,
from the Place de la Mairie, turning up the Rue Gambetta past the
market and on to the "Falaises," where the sea-breeze blows fresh and
free. Keeping to the right where the road forks, the "abattoir" was
soon left behind and the Villa Marbella reached; we then curved round
"Lac Chabiague," and ascending slightly between fields gay with the
"fleur des frontieres" [Footnote: A lovely blue flower, something like
a gentian.] and the wild daphne, we dipped again slightly to the point
where the road to St. Jean de Luz forks to the right. Bearing to the
left between hedges overgrown with _sarsaparilla_, and entering a
shady lane, a few minutes sufficed for us to reach the "Bois de
Boulogne," where the road skirts the Lake Mouriscot, and passes beside
many splendid clumps of the _Osmunda regalis_ fern. The lake is
very deep and full of fish; but bathing is certainly not advisable, as
there is a great quantity of reeds and weeds all round the water's
edge.

Leaving the pleasant woods, we emerged on to the Route Imperiale--the
direct road from the Negresse station (on the main line to Spain) to
Biarritz--and following it as far as the metals, we turned to the left
up the Irun-Bayonne route. This, however, was not our road for long, as
we took the first turning on the left-hand side up a pretty lane, which
brought Lake Marion into full view. The other end of the lane joins the
"Route Imperiale" again; which, leading in turn past the cemetery, the
parish church, and the terminus of the "steam tram-line," enters the
town near the International Bank.

It will be noticed that there are several ways of reaching Bayonne. The
cheapest and most expeditious, for marketing or other business
purposes, is by the narrow-gauge railway, with its curious double
carriages, one above the other. By driving the two miles to the
Negresse station, and catching the express from Spain, is another way,
but one not recommended to anybody but travellers [Footnote: Travellers
for the Pau line have to change at Bayonne, consequently it is simpler
for them to drive the five miles from Biarritz direct to Bayonne, than
drive two to the Negresse station, with the necessity of changing ten
minutes after entering the train.] going to stations on the line
between Bayonne and Paris. Of the three routes for driving we have
already mentioned the most frequented one--at the commencement of the
chapter; from the Negresse station by the Bayonne-Irun road is another;
and the last and prettiest passes behind the Villa Eugenie almost to
the lighthouse, but there branches off to the right past the Chambre
d'Amour inn, to the pine-woods near La Barre, and thence into Bayonne!
This drive may be prolonged in two directions: firstly, by crossing the
Nive and the Adour to the Guards' cemetery (where those who fell in the
sortie from Bayonne 1813-14, are buried) at St. Etienne; and secondly,
by following the bank of the river for some distance (past the market),
and turning up into the country by way of St. Pierre to the Croix de
Mouguere. This latter makes a splendid picnic, and the locality is a
rich hunting-ground for entomologists.

There are four other excursions that we must not omit to mention, viz.,
Cambo and the Pas de Roland, St. Jean de Luz, Fuenterabia, and San
Sebastien. All of these, with the exception of the first, can be
reached by _rail_, and as far as St. Jean de Luz the _road_
from Biarritz [Footnote: There is a more direct route to Cambo from
Bayonne.] is common to all; so that to save space we will only mention
it on our way to Cambo.

Starting at an early hour with plenty of provisions, we bowled down to
the Negresse station, crossed the line, and ascended the hill above
Lake Mouriscot, at the top of which Bidart--the first of the Basque
villages--comes into view.

Guetary (3 miles), standing on a hill to the southward, was next seen,
and in due time we reached St. Jean de Luz (8 miles), a town of over
4000 inhabitants (possessing a very good hotel and baths, and some
historical buildings), situated on a strip of sand between the River
Nivelle and the sea. Here the road to Cambo branched off to the left,
inland--the high road to Spain continuing near the seaboard--and
frequently skirting the Nivelle as far as St. Pee, we passed on by
Espelette to Cambo. The Hotel St. Martin there, which generally
attracts visitors for a few days at least, was not our destination; so
we took a glimpse at Fagalde's celebrated chocolate factory and the old
churchyard high above the river--while our horses were being
changed--and then resumed our journey to the Pas de Roland. [Footnote:
So-called from the fable that Roland, coming to the place and wishing
to cross, found the rocks barring his passage, so kicked them,
whereupon they parted for him to pass between.] The scenery now became
very charming, the winding river (Nive) adding much to the general
beauty, especially where it dashed out from between the rugged rocks of
the gorge with which Roland's name is associated.

After exploring this narrow pass we found a suitable place for luncheon
and sat down.

In returning, we halted near the village of Itsatsou, to gather some of
the lovely scarlet anemones [Footnote: A fee of 1 franc for one person,
or 2 francs for three, is expected for admission into the fields.]
which grow near there, and cover the fields with such a blaze of colour
as makes them conspicuous from a long distance. The rest of the journey
in the cool of the afternoon was very pleasant, but our route was the
same till reaching Bidart, where we curved to the left, and came by a
branch road (previously mentioned), _via_ the Villa Marbella and
the Falaises, back to our hotel.

At dinner that night we noticed that there had evidently been some
"goings and comings" among the guests; and doubtless the new arrivals
were congratulating themselves on having succeeded in getting rooms in
the hotel--for be it understood this good house is nearly always full,
as it deserves to be. We missed with sorrow the familiar forms of Mr.
and Mrs. Berecasque, who, with all their bigoted hatred for anything
approaching to High Church notions, were as a rule exceedingly genial
and good-natured, as fat people usually are.

The ladies certainly used to say that Madame had a perplexing way of
putting leading questions as to why somebody's daughter went with
somebody else's son, or what on earth could that nice gentlemanly young
curate (Low Church of course) see in that fast young lady who was
always working banners and such like enormities? But we never noticed
this; though that which on this particular evening probably no one
could fail to notice was, that their places were now occupied by a
couple of beings as strikingly thin as Mr. and Mrs. Berecasque had been
fat. We were told their name, but there was rather a buzz of
conversation going on at the time, and we might not have caught it
properly, but it certainly sounded like "Grouser." However, that does
not matter much; what is far more to the point is the amusement that
Mr. Grouser gave to those who had the privilege of sitting near him.
Apparently a self-made man, without any children--who by better
educations might have helped him to knowledge--his acquaintance with
the French language was like a peasant child's with turtle-soup;
perhaps "a lick and a promise" would best explain it. But though only
knowing a few words, which he pronounced with the vilest of accents,
and then only when he had inserted his glass in his eye, he brought
them out with ludicrous frequency whenever he had the chance. Here are
examples--"_Hi garsong!_ bring me another plate!" "_Garsong
poorquar_ don't you fetch some bread when I've asked three times for
it?" "_Hi garsong! sil voo plate_, where are those potatoes?" And
so on all through dinner; while he appeared rather to enjoy the
merriment he caused, thinking he must have said something really good,
although of course he hadn't the slightest idea what it was!

To sketchers and lovers of contrasts a visit to Fuenterabia cannot fail
to prove a treat, and a better specimen of an old Spanish town it would
be difficult to find. The only convenient train in the morning thither
leaves early, and although we preferred driving, we made an early start
too, in order to spend a long day. Having accomplished the eight miles
and arrived at St. Jean de Luz, we had still a distance of 8 miles more
before reaching Hendaye, the frontier town. There were occasional
pretty bits of country to be seen, especially in the vicinity of
Urrugne (10-1/2 miles), a village in which the Spanish element is
noticeable, but the succession of poplars along the roadside all the
way--more or less--to Behobie, was very monotonous. At Behobie (14-1/2
miles) the road to Hendaye leaves the direct route to Spain and
branches off to the right. Following this, we were soon at the
frontier. Hendaye (16 miles) is celebrated for its cognac and a certain
liquor called by its name, as well as for an excellent beach and
bathing establishment, beyond which there is little worth mention.
Having put up the horses at the Hotel de France, we repaired to the
jetty, where happily the tide was high enough to permit of our being
ferried across, instead of carried on the back of some brawny (and
garlicky) native. As we were half-rowed, half-poled, down the narrow
winding channel of the Bidassoa, we were once again indubitably "'twixt
France and Spain," though the vicinity of the ancient Spanish town, and
the lazy sentinels on the river's bank, made the scene much more
Spanish than French. Once landed, we strolled slowly across the
"_Embarcadero_," and entered the town by the ancient gateway. The
principal street, which we then ascended, is indeed picturesque. The
miniature verandahs and overhanging roofs of the houses, the latter
approaching so close to one another as nearly to permit of shaking
hands across; an occasional bright costume appearing at the window or
on the verandah; the old church higher up the street, and the battered
"Castilio" at the top, furnished ample materials for a very pleasant
sketch. The church is well worth a visit, being very old and of
interesting appearance. Owing to its sheltered position it did not
suffer nearly as much as most of the buildings from the missiles in the
late Carlist war. We passed several groups of lazy soldiers, who leered
at us offensively and made some uncomplimentary remarks, but
otherwise--beyond the fact that the women stared a good deal when Miss
Blunt attempted to sketch--we met with no discourtesy. The new casino
proves an "extra" attraction in summer, but it is to be regretted that,
for gambling purposes alone, many people should be drawn to this quaint
old-world town, so worthy of a visit for its picturesqueness alone.

At the time when we wished to visit San Sebastien we learnt that the
"Citadol" was closed to visitors, owing to some foreigner having
foolishly lighted his cigar near a powder magazine. As the "Citadol" is
the chief attraction, we penned a highly polite letter to his
Excellency the Governor of the Province, asking for his permission to
visit this otherwise forbidden ground.

We received a most gracious reply, to the effect that, whenever we
liked to come, the place was at our disposal, and accordingly selected
the first fine morning for our trip. On this occasion we formed a party
large enough for a coach and four, but were very careful to avoid a
repetition of our Betharram experiences.

We discovered no new features of interest as far as Behobie, but the
day being very clear, we had a fine view of the distant Pyrenees and
the Spanish coastline from various points along the road. Passing
through Behobie's narrow streets and crossing the Bidassoa by the
strong stone bridge, we were only a minute "'twixt France and Spain,"
and entering Irun found ourselves in the hands of the Customs
authorities. Having "nothing to declare" and nothing contraband
undeclared, we were soon permitted to proceed, although our "cocher"
almost immediately afterwards stopped to change horses. Accordingly, we
walked on up a pretty lane with ivied walls, near which--in the
background--stood an old church. Finding a comfortable place for
lunching in the vicinity, we awaited the arrival of the coach, and
discussed our hamper before again moving on. Not having too much time,
however, we did not delay long, and remounting, bowled merrily along to
"Pasages." This was once the safest port on the coast, and in fact is
yet; but the accumulation of sand, &c., at the entrance, has made it
practically useless for any ships but those of very light draught. It
forms a tidal basin, and houses are built on its sides, along one of
which the road for some time skirts, but afterwards assumes a straight
course and descends into San Sebastien. From the highest point of the
road, before we commenced descending, we had a splendid view of the
town, which looked busy, imposing, and clean.

When once inside, we drove to the Hotel de Londres; then crossed the
street to the guardhouse, presented our "permit" for the "Citadol," and
after a little fuss and _red tapeism_--such as Spaniards, even
more than Frenchmen, dearly love--under the guidance of a soldier,
commenced the ascent. How many times we presented our "carta" we know
not, but at every turn some official was ready to ask to see it, and
this business took almost as long as the actual mounting, though in the
end we did manage to reach the summit. The view from thence was very
fine, extending for miles in all directions, but after enjoying it for
a short time, we descended to visit the graves of the English who fell
in defending the place in 1836 against the Carlists, which lie in a
little cemetery on one side of the hill. Maiden-hair ferns grow among
the rocks by the path, which from time to time discloses views of the
town and the pretty rocky island--Santa Clara--in the bay. After
descending, we had time for a glimpse at the interior of the church of
Santa Maria and the bull-ring, as well as a stroll along the beautiful
beach, before it was necessary to start homewards, and when at length
we were deposited in safety at our hotel, we all acknowledged that the
day had been a very pleasant one indeed! With such enjoyable drives,
and the tennis, and the ever-changing sea, we never found time hang
heavily on our hands; and if we had, there was the little railway to
carry us into the bustle of Bayonne for shopping or listening to the
band, where _ennui_ would speedily have been driven away. Speaking
of this railway reminds us that at Anglet, one of the stations on the
line, there is a very interesting convent of "Silent Sisters" within
easy access from the train. Although it is a sad sight to see all these
women deluded with the notion that their sins, however great, could not
be pardoned without such a bitter expiation; yet the order and
cleanliness that is patent everywhere, and the gardens and greenhouses,
lend an attraction to the place in spite of its melancholy
associations. [Footnote: Visitors are expected to purchase a specimen
of the needlework exhibited to them, or at any rate to put a donation
in the convent box.]

When June has succeeded May, Biarritz begins to empty of its English
and American visitors, to give place in July to the Spaniards and
French. On the 15th of that month prices go up with a bound, often
becoming double and even treble what they were during the winter
season. This is the time to stroll on the "Plage" and watch the
bathing; to note the varied costumes, see the merry faces, and listen
to the children's laughter, mingled with the splash of the waves. But
we are only treating of spring, so must not encroach upon summer;
but--following our countrymen's example--bid "Au revoir" to Biarritz
before the glare forces us to parade the streets with blue spectacles
and double-lined parasols.




CHAPTER XIV.

CONCLUSION.

"Where duty leads"--Resorts in the Eastern Pyrenees--Caen--"Riou"--Our
paths diverge--"The Lesson of the Mountains"--Farewell.


Although we have in reality come to the end of our tour, and have
consequently no more places to discourse on, it may be suggested that
our task is but badly ended if we omit to mention such resorts as
Amelie, Vernet, Molitg, and other spots, which, if of less importance
than those we have visited, are nevertheless _in_ the Pyrenees.
That they are _in_ the Pyrenees cannot be disputed, but being in
the eastern portion, the way of reaching them from the resorts among
the western heights is so roundabout, that but few people would think
of visiting both. However, for the information of any intending
travellers, we have collected what reliable facts we could about the
above-mentioned places--as well as Capvern, Preste-les-Bains,
Panticosa, and a few others--which will be found in the general
information [Footnote: See Appendix A.] at the end of the volume, and
will, we trust, be of service.

We have but little left us now to do but to take our leave, though we
have one little incident to record, which, though it occurred far from
the Pyrenees, resulted, nevertheless, from our visit.

Travelling slowly homeward by the route through Normandy to Cherbourg,
we stopped a few days at the delightful town of Caen. While there--in
consequence of negotiations that had been carried on for some
time--Miss Blunt had her desires gratified by the arrival of a fine
Pyrenean puppy--like a small white bear with brown points--from
Cauterets, one of the identical pair about which we had such a lively
scene with the old French fancier. He was christened "Riou," after the
Col of that name, and his owner has very kindly drawn his portrait among
his native hills, to adorn these pages.

[Illustration: "MY PAW IS ON MY NATIVE HEATH, AND MY NAME IS 'RIOU.'"]

Our party did not break up till we reached Weymouth, but after that our
ways diverged. We were by no means glad to part, the memories of our
trip being very pleasant ones, and we can hardly think of a more
delightful way of spending a couple of months than in driving about
these beautiful mountains. The people are so pleasant, and hotels so
moderate (in the spring-time), and the country in the full beauty of
spring is at its best; and yet, as a rule, the few English and
Americans who do go, wait till the season begins, with its crowds,
heat, and extra expense, and the fiery sun has effectually cleared the
mountains of that snowy mantle which was their greatest charm.

We were once asked, "Are not the Pyrenees very bare mountains, without
any trees or herbage?" We could only repeat, what we have so often
asserted in this book, that the foliage on the mountain slopes is
magnificent, and their fertility and wealth of flora are of the highest
order.

They are indeed so beautiful in every way that they cannot fail to
touch many a chord in the heart of any lover of nature. At one moment
hid in mists, at another clear and stately under a cloudless sky; in
winter, wrapped completely in their garb of snow, trees and grass and
rocks and all, only to reappear under spring's influence, still
retaining their snowy crown, but with their slopes bright with the
contrasting tints of beech and fir, oak and maple, interspersed with
banks of bright gentian and fields of golden daffodils; what could be
more lovely than a scene such as this, with the morning sun gilding the
snow summits, or the last rays of a roseate sunset lingeringly bidding
them "Farewell"?

As we then follow their example, we do not think we could make a more
fitting ending than these lines, written amid those lovely scenes, and
entitled


"THE LESSON OF THE MOUNTAINS."

  Look on yon mountain peaks,
  Mark how each summit seeks
Upward to lift its crest, base earth to spurn.
  Tow'ring above the plain,
  Over the weak and vain,
Ever for realms of light seeming to yearn.

  Look at each snowy crown,
  Whiter than softest down,
Oh! in what majesty thus are they drest!
  See how the setting sun
  Kisses them one by one,
And slowly, solemnly, goes to his rest.

  Look to the brilliant sky;
  --Dark though the clouds be, nigh--
Wavelets of gold grandly float 'neath the blue.
  Mark where the shades of green
  Mingle with crimson's sheen,
Till evening's dread decree curtains the view.

  Hark to the drenching rain!
  Hark how it beats the pane!
While the fierce fitful blast sweeps on its course.
  Fiercer yet swells the gale,
  Hark to the long-drawn wail!
Tenfold more dire--in the darkness--its force.

       *       *       *       *       *

  See! morning's golden rays,
  Breaking night's gloomy haze,
Tinge with a burning glow every proud height;
  Storms beat on them in vain,
  Steadfast they will remain,
Till the eternal day swallows up night.

       *       *       *       *       *

  So may thy soul aspire
  Ever to climb up higher,
Spurning the world's delights, caring for none;
  Shunning vain pomps and shows,
  Seeking but calm repose
In the "Hereafter," when life is done.

[Illustration: "See! morning's golden rays, Breaking night's gloomy
haze, Tinge with a burning glow every proud height."]

   So may'st thou yearn to wear,
   Like ev'ry angel there,
Vestment as pure as snow, spotlessly white;
   And on thy face to shine
That radiancy divine,
God's own unquenchable, immortal light.

[Illustration]

   And, if life's courses seem
   Pleasant, like some sweet dream,
Be thou beware of the evils around:
   Paths seeming paved with gold
   Oft mighty sins enfold,
Oft where the sea looks still, quicksands abound.

   Or should the trials come,
   Shatt'ring thy earthly home,
Dashing fond hopes and despoiling thy life:
   Meekly thy burden bear
   To Jesus' throne, and there
Thou wilt find rest and help--strength for the strife.

   Then, when Heav'n's morning breaks,
   And ev'ry soul forsakes
This baser earth, and flies to its last rest,
   Chastened by cold and heat,
   Wash'd by the storms that beat,
Oh, may thy spirit soar 'mid God's own blest!


THE END.




APPENDIX A.

GENERAL INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PRINCIPAL TOWNS AND VILLAGES IN THE
PYRENEES, INCLUDING NOTES ON THE MEDICAL PROPERTIES OF THE BATHS AT THE
CHIEF RESORTS, AND THE EXCURSIONS IN THE VICINITY.


N.B.--_The following sign (||) attached to hotels, &c., in this
portion of the book, signifies that the Author can personally give his
recommendation._

AMELIE-LES-BAINS [Footnote: For routes thither see Appendix B.]
(678 ft.), on the River Tech, in the Eastern Pyrenees. A winter resort,
with a dry, clear air, tonic and slightly irritant, and a mean
temperature during the months of January, February, and March (taken
collectively) of 48-1/3 deg. Fahr. The average number of fine days in the
year is 210. The baths are naturally heated from 100 deg. to 144 deg.,
according to the distance from the source. They contain soda in
combination with sulphur, carbon, and silica, with a very small
proportion of the carbonates of iron and lime. They are recommended in
skin diseases, affections of the throat and kidneys, and for chronic
rheumatism. The season lasts throughout the year.

Bathing Establishments.--Thermes Pujade; Thermes Romains. With
hotel accommodation at both.

Hotels.--Pujade, Romains; Du Kursal, Farret, and Martinet.

Post and Telegraph Office, Cafes, Casino, Theatre, &c.--Living
is by no means expensive. In the first-named hotels the charge per diem
ought not to exceed 7frs. 50c. for "pension"; in the others it is
cheaper. The bathing establishments have excellent accommodation,
twenty-seven baths, a large swimming bath, inhaling rooms, etc.: There
are doctors in connection with the baths and others resident in the
town. The scenery around is very pretty, and rich in groves of olive,
cherry, cork, and fig trees, besides banks of heather and ferns, and
clusters of honeysuckle.

The Chief Excursions are:--

Prats de Mollo (2618 ft.), 12 1/2 miles by mule path--15 by
road; carriage (23 francs with pourboire) 5 1/4 hours.

Inns.--Maillard; Guin-Come.

Preste-les-Bains, 19 miles--8 1/2 hours; carriage 33 francs with
pourboire.

Roc de France (4698 ft.): splendid view; 6 1/2 hours there and
back. A stiff climb, fully compensated for by the expanse of scenery to
be seen from the summit.

Gouffre de la Fou, 4 hours there and back--guide necessary to
descend to the bottom of the "Gouffre," for which the "espadrilles"
(cord sandals) must be worn.

Col de Faitg, Massanet, 6 hours there and back--a very charming
and picturesque excursion.

La Junguera, 20 miles; carriage 23 francs, i.p. [Footnote:
i.p., including pourboire.] The first Spanish village over the
frontier; an interesting drive.

Le Pertus (958 ft.) 152 miles. There and back 6 hours. Carriage
23 francs, i.p. [Footnote: i.p., including pourboire.]

From Amelie to Perpignan, or vice versa, 23 1/2 miles; a
carriage with luggage costs 28 francs, i.p. [Footnote: i.p., including
pourboire.]

Carriages and Horses may be hired at Labrunie's or Victor
Olive's.

Guide.--Bertrand Oms at Aries.


ARCACHON [Footnote: The Chaplain, Mr. Radcliffe, has issued an
excellent guide-book for the locality.]--Situated in the forest, and on
the shores of the basin of the same name. The English season is in
winter, the French in summer. A favourite resort on account of its mild
and sedative climate. Most people live in villas in the forest during
the winter, where the strong winds are not felt, and where the mean
temperature is 50 deg. Fahr. The calmness of the atmosphere, and the strong
scent from the pines, has a beneficial tendency for those suffering
from chest complaints.

To those who find it relaxing, Biarritz is recommended as a suitable
change.

Hotels.--Grand (on the Plage), Continental, Grand du Foret, &c.

Pensions.--Villa Riquet || (Mons. Olle, proprietor), Villa
Montretout, Villa Peyronnet, and Villa Buffon.

Chaplain.--Rev. W. Radcliffe.

English Church, in the forest; services every Sunday.

Cabs, during the day from 6 A.M. to 8 P.M. The course:

1-1/2 frs. with one horse; 2 frs. with two horses; by the hour, 2-1/2
and 3 frs. respectively.

Horses and Donkeys, 2 frs. and 1 fr. the hour, respectively.

Boats, from 2 frs. the hour, by arrangement.

Bankers and Money Changers.--Dubos and Mauriac, opposite Grand
Hotel.

Post and Telegraph Office, Chemists, Grocers, &c.

Casino.

Principal Drives and Excursion are:--

To Moulleau, 2 miles through the forest.

To La Teste, 3 miles.

To the Oyster Beds, in the centre of the bay, on the Ile des
Oiseaux.

To the Lighthouse at Cape Ferret, across the basin, whence the
Biscay can be seen.

To the Dune de la Grave by boat, and across the forest to La
Teste, visiting the giant trees (this must only be undertaken with an
experienced guide).

ARGELES (1528 ft.), on the River Azun, in the Hautes-Pyrenees;
with a genial climate that makes it a favourite resort very early in
the year. Some few people use it as a winter abode also. Living costs
"en pension" from 9 to 14 frs. per diem.

Hotels.--De France; D'Angleterre || (cheaper than the France).

Carriages.--At Limoges, || can be hired for the afternoon
--with one horse, 5 frs.; 2 horses, 8 frs.; 4 horses, 10 frs.; or by
the day, or for any special excursion.

Horses, also from M. Limoges. For the afternoon, 4 frs.; for the
day, 8 to 10 frs. (N.B.--These are spring prices, and not those of the
season.)

Chemist.--M. Buale, near the Post Office.

Post and Telegraph Office, and a few shops.

The Chief Excursions are:--

To the Villages of Ges, Serres, Salles, and Ourous--a lovely
ride, 2 hours; horses, 4 frs. each, pourboire, 1/2 fr.

Drive round the Valley, via Argeles station, the Chateau de
Beaucens, Pierrefitte, and St. Savin, 2 hours 30 min.; carriage with 4
horses, 11 frs. 50 c., i.p.

Le Balandrau (1729 ft.). Lovely walk; one hour there and back.

Pic de Pibeste (4548 ft.) An easy climb: splendid view from the
summit.

ARGELES-SUR-MER, 13-3/4 miles from Perpignan. In the midst of
fertile fields. Ruins of the Castle de Pujols in the vicinity.

Hotels.--D'Angleterre, De France.

ARLES-SUR-TECH (909 ft.), in the Eastern Pyrenees. Chief town of
the canton and the principal commercial centre in the Tech valley.
2-1/2 miles from Amelie, which was formerly known as Arles-les-Bains.
Trade with Algeria in apples; and in whip-handles with the whole of
France. Old twelfth-century church in the town; and outside, behind a
grating, lies the tomb of the Saints Abdon and Sennen.

Hotels.--Rousseau, Pujade.

ARREAU (2190 ft.), at the junction of the valley of Louron with
the Aure valley, in the "Hautes-Pyrenees," 23-3/4 miles from Bagneres
de Bigorre and 19-1/4 from Luchon, on the direct mountain road. (Route
Thermale.)

Hotels.--De France, || D'Angleterre.

Post and Telegraph Office, Chemist, Grocer, &c.

In the town are the Chapelle de St. Exupere, with a good view from the
belfry; the Church of Notre Dame; and the ancient market-place. There
are manganese mines in the vicinity.

Excursions to Cardiac, 2 miles. Sulphurous baths, with hotel
accommodation.

To the forest of Riou-majou and the falls of Mail-Blanc and Ejet. Over
the Col de Plan to the Spanish villages of St. Juan, Gestain, &c. Up
the Vallee de Lastie to the Monne de Luchon (7044 ft.).

ARRENS (2950 ft.), in the valley of Azun, in the High Pyrenees,
on the Route Thermale, between Eaux Bonnes (19 miles) and Argeles
(7-1/2 miles).

Hotels.--De France et de la Poste, De la Paix.

Guides.--Jean Lacoste, M. Gleyre.

Excursions (for which it is an excellent starting-point).--Mont
Baletous, 10,318 ft. (the most dangerous point for the ascent--from
Eaux Bonnes it is much easier), 4 hours to the summit. Guide absolutely
necessary.

Lac Miguelon and Pic d'Arrouy--11 hours there and back; a
much-recommended trip.

Pic de Cambales, 9 hours (9728 ft.); an easy ascension; recommended.

ARUDY, in the Basses-Pyrenees, on the direct road from Oloron to
Eaux Bonnes or Chaudes; 17-1/4 miles from Oloron and 2 from
Louvie-Juzon. Grotte d'Arudy in the vicinity.

ASPIN, a small village in the Aure valley, Hautes-Pyrenees,
below the Col of the same name, on the road between Bigorre and Luchon.

ASTE, a village at the entrance to the Gorge de Lheris, near
Bagneres de Bigorre--to which refer. Ruins of an ancient castle in
which Gabrielle d'Estrelle lived. Church of 16th century. Visited by
Pitton de Tounefort, the naturalist.

BAGNERES DE BIGORRE (1808 ft.), standing at the mouth of the fine
valley of Campan and the lesser one of Salut. It is one of the most
celebrated bathing resorts in the Pyrenees, and is very rich in
springs. The climate is mild, and while the season only lasts from the
1st of June to the 15th of October, several English make it a residence
all the year round. It is in a great measure protected from the winds,
though they blow occasionally strongly and chillily; snow is a rare
visitor in the town, and with Argeles it shares the honour of being
among the earliest "changes of air" from the warmth of Pau. There are
nearly 50 springs divided between 17 establishments, and there is
hardly any known or unknown malady for which they cannot be
recommended. They may be divided into four classes: 1st, saline; 2nd,
ferruginous; 3rd, saline and ferruginous; 4th, sulphurous. They are all
naturally heated. The temperature ranges from 64 deg. to 123 deg. Fahr.;
and amongst the hottest is the "Salies," which contains a certain limited
quantity of arsenic, and is only used for drinking purposes. It is said
to be beneficial in laryngitis, ulcerous diseases, and affections of
the mouth and throat.

The Principal Establishment is known as the Thermes de
Marie-Therese, and contains 7 different springs, and 38 baths of
Pyrenean marble. In the winter the price for a bath (simple) varies
from 1 fr. to 1 fr. 60 cents, including linen. For a douche-bath 1 fr.;
a footbath 60 cents; and for other varieties from 1 fr. 25 cents to 3
frs. Every visit to the drinking-fountain costs 10 cents. In summer a
simple bath costs from 1 fr. 25 cents to 2 frs., and douche-bath the
same, while the others range from 1 fr. 25 cents to 5 frs.

The other most important establishments are those of Grand Pre, Sante,
Salut, and Lassere, while the water of Labassere is brought daily to
the town for drinking purposes.

This water of Labassere is sulphurous, and is considered highly
beneficial in cases of chronic bronchial catarrh, congestion of the
lungs, pulmonary consumption, spasmodic coughs, skin diseases, and
chronic laryngitis. See Labassere in Appendix.

Grand Pre has three springs, in all of which iron is present;
two are naturally heated, and are considered efficacious in scrofulous
diseases, nervous rheumatism, and general debility. The other spring,
which is cold and used only for drinking purposes, has a decided tonic
action.

Sante possesses two sources, one of which is artificially
heated; they are of a saline nature. These are _par excellence_
the "Ladies' Springs," and have great efficacy in cases of overwork,
shock to the nervous system, general nervousness, and neuralgia.

Salut possesses three sources of different temperatures,
employed in baths and for drinking purposes, as well. Except in very
hot weather the water is inodorous, but its sedative properties have
placed it in the first rank. It has been used with great benefit in all
nervous complaints, hypochondria, hysteria, intestinal complaints,
indigestion, &c., its action being also diuretic.

Lasserre has one source only, slightly bitter and inodorous,
containing sulphate of magnesia, which renders its action laxative. It
is useful in cases of obesity, liver affections, and others of that
type.

For the other establishments and springs, which have likewise their
special uses, the reader is referred to the 'Guide to Bigorre,' and
Joanne's Guide-book to the Pyrenees.

Hotels.--Beau Sejour; Paris; De Londres et d'Angleterre; Du bon
Pasteur; Frascati; &c. &c.

Banker and Money Changer.--D. Ortalis, 16 Place
Lafayette.

Doctors.--(In summer only) Dr. Bagnall from Pau, Promenade St.
Martin. Dr. Couzier, 27 Rue du Theatre (all the year). Dr. Dejeau, 30
Allee de Coustous (ditto).

Chemists.--M. Nogues, Place Lafayette; and M. Jouaneton, 22
Place de Strasbourg.

Restaurant.--M. Vignes, Place Lafayette.

Nurses.--Les Soeurs de l'Esperance, 9 Avenue de Salut.

Draper.--Cornet, Allee des Constons, No. 22.

Grocer (selling English goods of all kinds).--M. Peltier, 5
Boulevard du College.

Confectioners.--Mdme. Cheval, Rue du Centre, 19. M. Toujas, No.
10 same street.

Carriages.--Courtade, Place des Pyrenees, No. 14; Pourponnet, 3
Rue Labrun.

Horses.--Bourdettes, 25 Place Lafayette.

There is service all the year in the small English Church, and the
present chaplain, the Rev. J. Grundy, M.A. Oxon., is always willing to
assist visitors in any way, and glad to accept the offer of their
services in the choir.

The cost of living in the winter averages 10 frs. in the best hotels,
and between 7 and 9 in others; but the prices rise considerably in
summer.

Post and Telegraph Office, Theatre, Casino, Museum and
Reading-rooms in the town.

Guides.--Fages, senior and junior, 8 Rue de Lorry; Idrac, Rue
Longue; Arnaune, Rue de Lorry.

Principal Excursions:--[Footnote: For _full_ particulars of
these and all excursions, the reader is referred to P. Joanne's
'Pyrenees'; Mr. Packe's 'Guide to the Pyrenees for Mountaineers'; and
Count Russell's 'Grandes Ascensions des Pyrenees' (French and
English).] To Aste, Gerde, Lourdes, Campan, Baudean, Ste. Marie, the
Col d'Aspin, and up the Bedat and the Monne. Refer to Chapter II, for
information.

Caesar's Camp, 2 hrs. there and back, by the village of Pouzac.

Les Allees dramatiques, 2 hrs. there and back, riding--3 hrs.
on foot; between the Bedat and the Monne, a pretty walk.

The Slate Quarries and Spring of Labassere, 6 hrs. there and
back; 1-1/4 hrs. to Labassere; 2 hrs. to the Quarries; 3 hrs. to the
Spring. Guide 6 frs.; horses 10 frs. each.

The Mont-Aigu, 10 hrs. there and back, guide 15 frs. The view
from the summit is immense; it extends over three valleys.

The Vallee de Lesponne and the "Lac bleu," 9 hrs. there and
back. Carriage-road to the end of valley; mulepath the remainder of the
way. Guide 8 frs., horse 10 frs.

Gripp (10 miles). Carriage-road all the way. Same road as far as
Ste. Marie as that to Col d'Aspin.

Pic du Midi de Bigorre, 6 hrs. 45 min. to the summit; Guide 6
frs., horse 10 frs. A magnificent excursion, but easier from Bareges.

Pene de l'Heris, 2 hrs. 45 min. to summit. A pleasant excursion.

Houn Blanquo, 9 hrs. there and back. Guide 8 frs., horse 10 frs.
A splendid mountain panorama in view, from the summit.

Puits de la Pindorle [Footnote: See footnote p. 226.]--a natural
ice-cave, spoken of by Mr. Packe as "unique in its kind in the
Pyrenees"--8 hrs. there and back. Guide and ropes necessary.

BAGNERES DE LUCHON (2065 ft.).--A lovely town in the Western
Pyrenees (Hautes), situated near the junction of the Pique with the
One, at the mouth of the Larboust valley, and in the western angle of
the valley of Luchon.

The most fashionable of all the Pyrenean watering-places.

Season.--1st of June to the end of October; but most charming in
May and early June.

The Bathing Establishment is a very ponderous building,
containing accommodation second to none. The springs are nearly all
naturally heated, varying from 103 deg. to 150 deg. Fahr.; they may be divided
into four classes: 1st, sodium sulphate; 2nd, saline; 3rd, bicarbonate
of iron; 4th, saline, but cold. The sulphur springs are considered the
best and most complete series known; and the iron are principally used
for drinking purposes. The waters of Luchon are considered specially
beneficial for chronic bronchitis, rheumatism (articular and muscular),
vesical catarrh, reopened wounds, fractures, scrofulous and cutaneous
affections, and ulcers. In cases where there are complications, nervous
excitement, or paralysis, a medical man should always be consulted
before venturing to bathe.

There is an iron spring near the Castelvieil, 1-1/2 miles from Luchon.

In the "Etablissement Thermal" the terms range from 60 cents to 4 frs.
There are baths of all kinds, and it is advisable, if the bather wishes
to bathe at any special time, that he should enter his name in the book
kept for that purpose, as soon as he arrives. In the season there is
always a great pressure of visitors, and otherwise the bather may have
to wait an hour or two for his turn. There was once a Museum
above the baths, this has now been removed to the splendid
Casino which stands in beautiful grounds, not far from the
Post and Telegraph Office--entrance I franc.

Hotels.--Canton, || Richelieu (very large but not recommended),
Grand, Bonnemaison, Paris, d'Angleterre, d'Etigny, de France, des
Bains, Monteil, du Parc, de la Paix.

Apartments.--Of all descriptions, in the Allee des Bains, Rue
Neuve, Cours d'Etigny, Allee des Veuves, &c. &c.

Doctors.--Several, both attached to the baths and independent.

Carriage and Horse Proprietors.--Almost innumerable, but Jean
Sanson is recommended, Rue d'Espagne.

Guides.--For the summits (French): Pierre Barrau, Rue de Pigue,
Aurillon, Lafon fils, Capdeville senior and junior, Fermin Barrau.
(Spanish) Francisco. For ordinary excursions and hunting: Jean and Luis
Sanson; Jean Brunet, chamois-hunter (recommended for all ascensions
from the Lac d'O).

Tariff for drinking the waters only.--During season, 8 days, 4
frs.; 20 days, 8 frs.; 30 days, 10 frs.

Carriage on Hire (from the stand).--The "course," 1 franc; the
hour, 3 frs. for one horse; and 1 fr. 30 cents, and 3 frs. 75 cents
respectively, for two horses--by day. By night, for one horse, 2 frs.
50 cents the "course," and 4 frs. the hour; for two horses, 3 frs. 25
cents and 5 frs. respectively.

For all excursions there is a recognised tariff, which may be seen at
the Mairie; and an excellent local guide-book and map is published for
2 frs. by Lafont.

The Chief Excursions:--

For Superbagneres (horses and guide 5 frs. each respectively,
hay on the summit 1 fr. out of the season, but 2 frs. more each person
in the season), Vallee du Lys (20 to 25 frs. for a landau), Bosost
(carriage _via_ St. Beat, 45 frs., horses via the Portillon 5 frs.
each, guide 6 frs.), Montauban (an easy walk), the Orphanage of Notre
Dame du Rocher (a short and pleasant walk), St. Mamet (little more than
1/2 mile), the Rue d'Enfer (an easy climb from the Vallee du Lys), the
Tour de Castelvieil (about two miles from Luchon), &c. &c. Refer to
Chapter X.

The Val d'Esquierry (4839 ft.), 11 miles.--Carriage-road as far
as Grange d'Astos (25 to 30 frs.) very rich in flora.

To the Hospice de Prance and the Cascades--des Demoiselles, et du
Parisien, 9 1/4 miles. Carriage-road all the way. Landau, 25 frs.;
but 4 frs. per seat in the Hospice diligence there and back.

To the Port de Venasque and the Pic de Sauvegarde, returning by
the Port de la Picade; 10 miles to the Port de Venasque--1 hour further
to the summit of the Pic de Sauvegarde; 11 miles from the Port de la
Picade to Luchon. Time, 10 to 11 hours there and back; but this fine
excursion is rendered more enjoyable by sleeping at the Hospice
(_vide_ above), and starting early next day for the summits.

The Valley Of Oueil and the village of Bourg (9 1/3
miles). Carriage there and back, 30 frs. From Bourg the Pic de
Montne can be ascended. Splendid sunrise view from summit. Guide
recommended if ascension is made by night; horses 7 frs., guides 10
frs.; or by day 7 frs.

Lac d'Oo (10 miles).--Carriage-road for 8 miles. Landau, 25 frs.
This lake, also called Seculejo, is full of salmon-trout, and there is
a very fine cascade (820 ft.) on the far side, to which visitors can be
ferried. Fare for one person 1 1/4 frs.--for more, an arrangement can
be made. There is a small toll levied on every person who visits
this lake--no matter whether they patronise the little inn or not!

Saint Beat.--By carriage 25 frs., or by rail to Marignac and
diligence afterwards (12 1/2 miles). Refer to Chapter XI.

L'Antenac.--6 1/2 hours to the summit and back. Horse and guide
each 6 frs. An enjoyable excursion; and the whole distance can be
ridden.

Pic Spijoles.--4 1/2 hours from the Lac d'Oo--a difficult
ascension.

Pic de Crabioules.--13 hours up and down. Guide necessary.
Splendid view.

Pic Quairat.--5 hours from the Lac d'Oo. Guide necessary.

Le Cecire.--8 hours up and down. Guide and horses 6 frs. each.

Pic Sacroux,--8 1/2 hours to the summit and back. Very fine
view.

The Peaks Bacanere and the Pales de Burat (11 3/4
miles).--9 hours there and back. Horses and guides from 5 to 8 frs.
each, according to season. One of the most charming of all the
excursions from Luchon.

L'Entecade.--7 hours in all. Guides and horses 6 frs. each. A
much-regimented climb. Splendid view from summit.

Pic de Poujastou.--8-1/2 hours in all. Guides and horses 6 frs.
each; an easy climb.

The Mont Maudits or Maladetta Group, the highest in the
range, including the Pic de Nethou (11,169 ft.), Pic 'du Milieu (11,044
ft.), Pic de la Maladetta (10,867 ft.), Pic d'Albe (10,761 ft.), and
the Pic Fourcanade (9456 ft.), are so difficult and perilous, and
require such excellent guides, that the reader is referred for
information to Mr. Packe's and Count Russell's books, previously
mentioned.

_Note_.--Carriages from Bigorre to Luchon, 43-1/2 miles,
_via_ Arreau, 80 to 100 frs., 5 to 10 frs. pourboire, out of the
season; 100 to 130 frs., and pourboire 10 frs., in the season.

BAREGES (4084 ft.), situated in a barren rocky gorge above Luz,
in the Hautes-Pyrenees. It may be called the "Old Soldier's Resort,"
as the waters are specially efficacious for gunshot wounds.

The fine Bathing Establishment contains 30 separate bath-rooms,
besides 3 douche-rooms, a spray-room, foot bath-room, &c. The springs
vary in heat from 71 deg. to 112 deg. Fahr., and are of a similar nature,
all containing large proportions of sulphur and baregine. Dr. Lee says,
"The water when drunk has a diuretic, diaphoretic, and expectorant
action; the bath, by its general and local stimulating properties,
cleanses foul ulcers,... promotes the exfoliation of carious portions
of bone and subsequent cicatrisation, and frequently causes foreign
bodies which have been long imbedded ... to make their way to the
surface." It is also highly beneficial for old bullet-wounds, neuralgic
affections, rheumatic pains, and stiff joints.

Hotels.--Del'Europe, De France, Des Pyrenees, Richelieu. Board
and lodging from 10 to 15 frs. per day in the season (15th of June to
September). No hotels open in winter, as the village is covered with
snow.

The Climate even in summer is variable--great heat is frequently
followed by great cold, necessitating the wearing of woollen
under-clothing, which should always be taken.

Bathing Tariff, &c.--Baths and douches from I fr. to 2 frs. 50
cents. For each visit to the drinking-room 5 cents; subscription for
one month, 10 frs.

Apartments.--One room, from 2 frs. 50 cents to 6 frs. per day,
according to position and size.

Doctors at the Establishment, a few independent, and others from
Luz.

[Illustration: TWIXT FRANCE AND SPAIN PANORAMA OF THE HIGHER PYREAN
CHAIN.----VIEW TAKEN FROM THE SUMMIT OF THE PIC DU MIDI DE BIGORRE.]

Post and Telegraph Office in the season.

Carriages, Horses, and Asses in abundance; apply at the hotels.

Guides.--Of the 1st class: Bastien, Teinturier, Michael Pontis,
Menvielle, &c. &c. for the lofty peaks; several of the 2nd class for
minor excursions.

Chief Excursions::--

For the Promenade Horizontale and the Vallee de Lienz, refer to
Chapter VI.

Pic de Nere.--6 hrs. there and back. Beware of vipers.

Pic du Midi de Bigorre.--8 hrs. up and down. Guide and horses, 5
frs. each. The favourite excursion in the vicinity, and one of the
finest in the Pyrenees. The panorama which is annexed is on a fine day
truly magnificent. Horses can be taken to the summit, where there is an
excellent inn.

Lacs d'Escoubous.--2 hrs. to the Lac d'Escoubous; 2 hrs. 30 min.
to the Lac Blanc; 2 hrs. return. Guide 4 to 6 frs., horses ditto.

Pic d'Ayre.--6 to 7 hrs. up and down. Horses can be taken within
1/2 hr. of summit. Guide 6 frs., horses ditto.

Pic de Lienz.--5 hrs. up and down. A pleasant climb. See Chapter
VI.

Le Neouville.--12 hrs. by the Col d'Aure, there and back. Guide
necessary--10 frs. Splendid view over all the higher Pyrenees.

BAUDEAN.--A village in the Campan valley on the Route Thermale,
between Bigorre and Luchon, in the Hautes-Pyrenees.

BAYONNE.--City and first-class fortress in the Basses-Pyrenees,
on the Adour and the Nive, standing some 2 miles from the shores of the
terrible Biscay Bay. On the direct line from Bordeaux to Biarritz and
Spain.

Hotels.--St. Etienne, Du Commerce, Ambassadeurs, St. Martin, De
la Bilbaina, De la Guipuzcoaena, and Du Panier fleuri. Rail to Negresse
station for Biarritz; also narrow-gauge railway to Biarritz _via_
Anglet.

Splendid twin-towered cathedral, ancient fortifications, &c. Excellent
market and good shops, which are more reasonable than at Biarritz.

Post and Telegraph Office, English Vice-Consulate, &c.

Cabs.--The course 1 fr., the hour 2 frs. 25 cents and 50 cents
extra respectively for 2 horses.

Chocolate.--Fagalde.

Excursions to Cambo (10 miles), Croix de Mouguere, Lc., see Chapter
XIII.

BEHOBIE.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, on the direct road
to Spain, 14-1/4 miles from Biarritz.

BETHARRAM.--A pleasantly-situated village in the
Basses-Pyrenees, once a favourite pilgrimage. There is a lovely bridge
in the vicinity, and the Via Crucis just midway between the village and
the bridge. It is situated on the direct road from Pau to Lourdes, and
is 15 miles distant from the former, and 9-1/4 from the latter. The
station on the railway, "Montaut-Betharram," is about 2 miles from the
village.

Inns.--De la Poste, De France. Celebrated grotto in the
vicinity.

BIARRITZ, a favourite English winter resort on the shores of
the Biscay, in the Basses-Pyrenees--2 miles from the Negresse station
on the direct line to Spain, and 130 miles from Bordeaux. Living during
the winter is considerably cheaper than at Pau, but the winds are much
stronger and the air more bracing. Biarritz makes a valuable change
from both Pau and Arcachon. It is free from epidemics, and beneficial
in cases of paralysis, as well as chest and heart complaints.

Hotels.--De Paris et de Londres, || Il Grand Hotel, D'Angleterre
(the favourite hotel with English people), Des Ambassadeurs, De France,
Il Des Princes, De l'Europe, De la Poste, &c.

Apartments.--All over the town, varying in price according to
position. Maison Brocq, || Maison Larrode, || Maison Broquedis.

English Pension.--Villa du Midi, || Rue des Champs.

Doctors.--Dr. Welby, || Rue Gambetta. Dr. Malpas; Dr.
Girdlestone.

Carriages.--Mauemus, || Place St. Eugenie. Larrondat, Place de la
Marie.

Libraries.--One in connection with the English Church. Lending
library at Victor Benquet's, Place de la Marie (stationer, Lc.).

Confectioners.--Figue, || Rue Mazagran; Miremont.|| Place de la
Marie.

Photographer.--P. Frois, Rue du Port Vieux.

Banker.--E. H. Bellairs, Esq. (Vice Consul), International
Bank.

"Depot Anglais," for wines, groceries, and English provisions,
&c.

English Club, Post and Telegraph Office.

For principal excursions refer to Chapter XIII.

BIDART.--The first Basque village, 3 miles from Biarritz on the
direct route to Spain--railway station, Bidart-Guetary.

BIELLE.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, on the road to Eaux
Bonnes, in the Val d'Ossau, 18-1/4 miles from Pau. Inn, des Voyageurs.

BILHERES.--A village on the slopes of the Val d'Ossau, above
Bielle, in the Basses-Pyrenees--celebrated for the copper mines in the
vicinity. It lies in the direct track from the Val d'Ossau to the
Vallee d'Aspe.

BlLLERES.--A small village near Pau, in the Basses-Pyrenees on
the road to the ancient town of Lescar: the locally well-known "Bois de
Billeres" take their name from it.

BIZANOS.--A village below Pau, on the Gave, in the
Basses-Pyrenees, on the direct road to Lourdes.

BOO-SILHEN.--A village and railway station on the line from
Lourdes to Pierrefitte, in the Hautes-Pyrenees. There is the site of an
ancient camp in the vicinity.

BOSOST.--A village in Spain (18 miles from Luchon by the
Portillon), under the shadow of the Eastern Pyrenees, in the valley of
Aran. This is a most pleasing excursion from Luchon, either on
horseback via the Portillon, or in a carriage via St. Beat. See Chapter
X. Inn, Fonda d'Espana.

CAMBO.--A small picturesquely-situated bathing resort on the
banks of the Nive, 10 miles from Bayonne, in the Basses-Pyrenees. A
favourite excursion from Biarritz, with the extra attraction of good
fishing.

Bathing Establishment, with a hot sulphur and cold ferruginous
spring. The former has proved useful for its diuretic and laxative
qualities, and efficacious in cases of languor following long
illnesses: the latter is very rich in iron, and a useful tonic.

The Climate is exceedingly healthy in spring and autumn, but too
warm in summer.

Hotel.--St. Martin.

Chocolate Manufactory.--Monsieur Fagalde's.

Doctor.--M. Albert Dotezac.

Carriages, Horses, and Asses, at various rates.

CAMPAN (2192 ft.)--A village in the Hautes-Pyrenees (3-3/4 miles
from Bigorre) situated in the valley of the same name--on the direct
road from Bigorre to Luchon; possesses an ancient church and
market-place.

CAPVERN.--A bathing resort in the Hautes-Pyrenees, built on a
hill two miles distant from the bathing establishments, which are
erected in a narrow ravine. One of the stations on the main line
between Toulouse and Pau, being 78 miles distant from the former and 56
from the latter. The climate is mild, and the season lasts from the 15th
of May to the 1st of November.

Two Bathing Establishments--De Hount-Caoudo and de Bouride. The
water principally contains sulphate of lime with a small proportion of
carbonate of iron: its action is diuretic and laxative. It is an
excellent and bracing tonic, stimulating to the digestion, and has also
been beneficially employed in cases of catarrh and certain liver
complaints. The Hount-Caoudo spring has an exciting tendency; that of
Bouride a sedative one.

Hotels.--Grand, Beau Sejour, De Fontaine, De la Paix, Des Bains, etc.

Post and Telegraph Office in the season. CASTETS.--A small
picturesquely-situated village in the Hautes-Pyrenees--off the high
road between Pau and Eaux Bonnes--under a mile from Louvie Juzon.
Lodging can be obtained at M. Fouga's.

CAUTERETS (3254 ft.)--A town situated in the gorge of the same name in
the Hautes-Pyrenees, seven miles distant from Pierrefitte, the terminus
of the line from Lourdes. It is said to be the most rich in mineral
waters of any resort in the Pyrenees. From its position in a hollow,
surrounded by lofty and beautiful mountains, it is frequently visited
with a good deal of rain, and the climate is subject to severe changes
in temperature, especially in spring, when the mornings and nights are
cold. The season proper begins about the middle of June and lasts to
the 15th of September. Living out of the season averages about 10 frs.
per diem, but is much greater when once July has arrived, and
consequently it is always best to write and make terms beforehand.

There are Nine Establishments for the Waters, among which twenty-four
springs are divided. The springs may be classed under two
heads--firstly, sodium sulphate; 2ndly, saline--both naturally heated.

The three most important establishments are--Les Oeufs, La Raillere,
and Les Thermes de Vieux Cesar. The others are--Le Rocher-Rieumiset,
Manhourat et Les Yeux, Pauze Vieux, Pauze Nouveaux, Petit St. Sauveur,
and Le Pre; in addition to which there are two "buvettes," known as
Buvette de Cesar and Le Bois. The waters at the Cesar Vieux are the
most exciting of all, and prove beneficial in scrofulous and cutaneous
affections, rheumatism, and tumours. Les Oeufs are specially
efficacious in lung complaints; La Raillere is used successfully in
affections of the respiratory passages; Mauhourat is specially
recommended to aid the digestion of La Raillere's water; while Les Yeux
are beneficial for affections of the eyes--as the name suggests. Le
Petit St. Sauveur is efficacious in cases of hysteria and similar
complaints.

Hotels.--Du Parc, || Continental, De France, Richelieu, Des Promenades,
Des Boulevards, De la Paix, De Londres, Des Bains, D'Angleterre, etc.

Apartments to be found in all parts. The price of a single-bedded room
varies from 3 to 10 frs. in the season. Much less at other times.

Doctors, in connection with the "Thermes," and many independent
ones.

Chemists.--J. Latapie and M. Broca--both in the Place St.
Martin.

Confectioners.--Patisserie Suisse, Rue Cesar; Patisserie
Pyreneenne, Rue de la Raillere.

Horses and Carriages in plenty--good steeds at
Dominique's, Rue de la Raillere.

Guides.--Sarrettes, Clement Latour, Latapie, Barraga, Bordenare;
and also Berret, Lac Dominique, and Pont Dominique.

Post and Telegraph Office, Theatre, Casino, &c. Tariff
for bathing, &c., similar to other resorts.

Horses for Excursions cost about 12 frs. for the day, for
an ordinary trip 6 frs.; and for a few hours' ride 4 to 5 frs., with 50
cents to the ostler.

Carriage from Argeles, 20 frs. with luggage; pourboire 3
frs.

The Chief Excursions are:--

To the Col de Riou.--Splendid view. Guide 6 frs., horses 6 frs.
Can be prolonged down the opposite side to St. Sauveur.

To the Cascade de Cerizey, Pont d'Espagne, and Lac de
Gaube.--Guides each 8 frs., horses 6 frs. The favourite trip.

Le Cabaliros.--6 hrs. up and down. Guide 10 frs., horses 10 frs.

Le Monne.--7 hrs. up and down. Horses and guide 10 frs. each,
donkey 8 frs. Splendid view.

Pic d'Enfer.--8-1/2 hrs. and 12 hrs. respectively by the two
routes. Good guides necessary--a difficult climb.

For the Vallee de Lutour refer to Chapter V. Pic
d'Ardiden.--9 hrs. Guide essential--an interesting climb.

Pic de Vignemale,--18 to 20 hrs. not including rests. Guides,
hatchets, and ropes necessary. Magnificent view from summit, but a very
difficult trip.

CIER-de-Luchon.--A small village in the Haute Garonne, 4-1/2
miles from Luchon on the railway from thence to Montrejeau.
CIERP.--A small village at the foot of a rock in the Pique
valley--dep. Haute-Garonne--near Marignac, station for St. Beat on the
line between Luchon and Montrejeau. COARBAZE.--A village in the
Basses-Pyrenees on the road between Pau and Lourdes. Railway station on
line connecting the above places; 10-1/2 miles from Pau. The ruins of a
castle in the neighbourhood, in which Henry IV. spent his childhood.
Refer to Chapter I. DAX.--A town on the Adour, and junction for
Bordeaux from the Bayonne and Pau lines. Celebrated for its baths,
which are of three kinds, steam, mud, and water. There are several
bathing establishments, but the Grand Etablissement is the best, where
board and lodging can be also obtained, at an all-round figure,
including baths, of from 10 to 15 frs. per diem. These baths are very
useful for affections of the larynx, articular enlargements, and most
kinds of rheumatism and neuralgia. When drunk the water has a tonic and
diuretic effect.

Hotels.--De la Paix, Du Nord, De France, Figaro, De l'Europe.

There are enjoyable walks about the town and some old ruins; and in the
vicinity a bed of fossil salt.

EAUX BONNES is a miniature Spa hemmed in by the sides of a
wooded gorge in the Basses-Pyrenees--27-1/2 miles from Pau and 6-1/4
from Eaux Chaudes; railway communication as far as Laruns ought now to
be established: refer to Chapter XII. The waters, hot and cold, consist
of five springs, sulphuret of sodium being largely present in all, and
sulphate of lime in a less degree. There are two establishments
--the Grand and the Ortech; but the former is far the most
commodious, though the water is used for drinking purposes almost
more than for bathing. The temperature varies in the different springs
from 54 deg. to 88 deg. Fahr. The waters are specially recommended in
cases of pulmonary consumption and affections of the air passages--also
for chronic maladies of the abdominal viscera, intermittent fevers,
hypochondria, and hysteria.

The Tariff is similar to that at the other Spas. Season,
July and August.

The Climate is mild, but warm in summer.

Hotels.--De France, || Princes, Empereurs, Richelieu, Poste,
Europe, Sallenave, Des Touristes, D'Espagne et d'Orient, De l'Univers,
etc.

Apartments all over the town. The following are a few of the
houses that let rooms:--Bonnecaze, Pomme, Berdou, Tourne. Living in
hotels during the season costs from 10 to 20 frs., according to
_etage,_ per diem.

Chemists.--Cazaux fils, and Tourne.

Confectioners.--Patisserie Suisse.

Post and Telegraph Office.--The Route Thermale runs from
Eaux Bonnes to Argeles, 26-1/2 miles: see Chapter XII.

Doctors in connection with the baths, and independent ones.

Horses and Carriages at the hotels, etc.

Guides.--Orteig, Lanusse, and Jean Pierre for lofty summits; also
Maucor and Caillau, who, with Lanusse, are Horse proprietors
as well. It is necessary to bargain about prices, as there
is no fixed tariff, but 10 to 13 frs. per diem for ordinary
trips ought to suffice, without providing food--with food, 3 or 4 frs.
less.

The Chief Excursions are:--

For the Col de Gourzy and the Cascades du Valentin refer to Chapter
XII.

Pic de Ger.--10 to 12 hours there and back. Guide 20 frs. and
provisions necessary. Magnificent view.

Le Gabizos.--Whole day; provisions, liquor, and guide necessary.
A tiring climb, but one of the finest views in the Pyrenees.

Pic de Goupey.--7 hours up and down; guide necessary.

Pic de St. Mont.--9 hours up and down, easy climb, guide not
necessary.

Lacs d'Anglas et d'Uzious.--Guide and provisions necessary; a
whole day; splendid excursion.

EAUX CHAUDES.--Another miniature Spa--less contracted in its
position, but equally picturesquely situated in a wild gorge in the
Basses-Pyrenees, 27-1/2 miles from Pau. The climate is bracing, but on
account of the situation of the town it is not so good a residence for
invalids with chest complaints as Eaux Bonnes--as the wind sweeps up
the valley unchecked. It is, however, a glorious place for healthy
people to stay in, and a good centre for excursions.

The Bathing Establishment is a fine building with good accommodation.
There are seven important springs and two of less consequence;
and they partake of the same nature as those of Eaux Bonnes,
though the temperature extends about 10 deg. Fahr. higher. They are
largely charged with sulphur and lime, in combination with carbon and
soda, and have an exciting action. They are especially useful in cases
of catarrh, rheumatism, cutaneous diseases, and neuralgia. The
"buvettes" of Baudot and Minvielle are largely patronised.

Hotels.--Baudot, || De France; and more expensive accommodation
at "L'Etablissement Thermal."

Prices are less than at Eaux Bonnes. In the season they range from 10
to 16 frs., but from 8 to 12 at other times, "En Pension."--For one day
or less than a week no fixed price can be quoted.

Doctors.--One in connection with the establishment.

Horses and Carriages to be obtained at the hotels or from the guides,
who are mostly horse proprietors.

Guides.--Camy, Labarthe, Larrouy, Eugene Olivan, Jean Sallenave.
Tariff not fixed, but 7 to 9 frs. per diem without providing food is
sufficient, and 5 to 8 frs. for horses--though this is only for
ordinary excursions and not perilous ones.

Bathing Tariff.--Similar to that of other Spas.

Chief Excursions are:--

Goust.--1 hour there and back; mule track.

Grotte des Eaux Chaudes.--2 hours there and back--for lights and
permit 1 fr. 50 c. each is charged, guide 2 frs.

Gabas and the Bious-Artigues.--See Chapter XII. Rather over 8
miles; carriage road to Gabas, fine and pleasant trip.

Baths of Panticosa.--13 to 15 hours by the mule track; a
favourite way into Spain.

To Huesca by Sallent and Jaca, a very lengthy trip, requiring
several days.

Pic Scarput.--10 hours up and down; a very fine climb.

Lac d'Artouste.--10 hours up and down; a viper region.

Pic d'Arriel.--10 hours up and down; an exceedingly fine view
from summit, but not an easy climb.

Le Balaitous--14 hours. For ascension only, it is necessary to
have good guides (at least two), as well as provisions, and to pass the
night on the mountain in the Cabanes near the Lac d'Artouste. A
difficult excursion, not unattended with considerable danger.


FONTARABIE (Fuenterabia, Sp.). A quaint old Spanish town on the
left bank of the Bidassoa, just across the frontier, well worthy of a
visit. About equidistant from the stations of Hendaye (Fr.) and Irun
(Sp.) on the direct line from Bordeaux to Madrid. A pleasant excursion
from Biarritz.


GABAS.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, 5 miles from Eaux
Chaudes, near the famous plateau of the Bious-Artigues. Inn
accommodation can be had, and it is a good starting-point for several
excursions.


GAN.--A village in the Val d'Ossau in the Basses-Pyrenees, 5
miles from Pau. The road from Pau forks here, one branch leading to
Oloron (15-1/2 miles), the other to Eaux Bonnes and Eaux Chaudes
(22-1/2 miles). There are some mosaics under a shed in the vicinity.
Hotel (such as it is), Des Voyageurs.


GAVARNIE (4380 ft.). An unpretentious village with good hotel
accommodation, situated among some of the most magnificent scenery in
the Hautes-Pyrenees, 13 miles from Luz. For full description of the
Cirque of Gavarnie refer to Chapter VIII., also for the Falls of
Marbore, 1380 ft.

Hotels.--Des Voyageurs;|| De la Cascade.

There are several Mountains to be ascended in the neighbourhood
requiring experienced guides; among which are Le Pimene, the Breche de
Roland, Le Taillon, Le Gabietou, Le Marbore, Pic d'Astazou, and the
Mont Perdu; but for further information the traveller is referred to
the previously recommended authorities.

No Guides have a better reputation than those of Gavarnie, and
of these Henri Passet and Celestin Passet have made all the great
ascents of the French and Spanish Pyrenees; Pierre Pujo, Pierre Brioul,
Poc, and Haurine are also men of experience in mountaineering.

[Illustration: CIRQUE OF THE VALLEE DU LYS NEAR BAGNERES-DE LUCHON.]

Horses to the Cirque, 2 frs. each. Guides, 2 frs. each.
Asses, 1 1/2 fr. each.

GAZOST-les-Bains.--A village in the Vallee du Nez, 7 1/3 miles
from Lugagnan (the nearest station), on the line between Pierrefitte
and Lourdes, in the Basses-Pyrenees. The baths, fed by four cold
sulphurous springs, are less than 3/4 of a mile from the village, where
there is a large sawmill. Very few people visit the baths, and they are
in a miserable state. There are copper, zinc, and argentiferous lead
mines in the neighbourhood.

Rooms at the Chalet de la Scieric.

GEDRE (3214 ft.).--A poor village in lovely scenery (see
engraving, page 122), on the side of a rocky gorge in the
Hautes-Pyrenees, 8 miles from Luz and 4 from Gavarnie, on the direct
road between the two.

Hotels.--Des Voyageurs, Palasset.

For information on the so-called Grotte de Gedre see Chapter VIII. The
two chief excursions from Gedre are those to the Vallee de Heas
and the Cirque de Troumouse, though they may be considered as one trip
here. From Gedre to the chapel of Heas 2 to 2 1/2 hours, from the
chapel to the fork of the road 1/2 hour, and from thence to the Cirque
1 hour. This is a very fine excursion, occasionally undertaken from Luz
and St. Sauveur.

GERDE.--A village in the Campan valley, in the Hautes-Pyrenees,
near Bigorre. Known chiefly for the _palomieres_ or pigeon traps
among the trees above it. See Chapter II.

GRIPP (3448 ft.).--A well-situated village in the
Hautes-Pyrenees, on the Route Thermale, between Bigorre and Bareges, 2
1/2 miles from Ste. Marie. Tourists often find the Hotel des Voyageurs
comfortable enough to keep them there for a few days. A little beyond
the village on the old road are the Baths of Bagnet, supplied by
a cold sulphurous spring; they do not, however, call for much mention.
The Falls of Garet are in the immediate vicinity.

GRUST.--A small village in the Hautes-Pyrenees. Refer to Sazos
in Appendix.

GUETARY.--A Basque village in the Basses-Pyrenees, 3 miles from
Biarritz. The railway station, Bidart-Guetary, on the line between
Bordeaux and Madrid, is not far from the village.

HEAS.--A hamlet in the Hautes-Pyrenees, five miles from Gedre
and eight from Gavarnie, by the Pimene.

Inn.--De la Munia, kept by Victor Chappelle, hunter; besides
whom, Jacques Canton and Francois Lavignolle, chamois-hunters, are
excellent guides. Chief excursion to the Cirque de Troumouse. See
Gedre.

HENDAYE.--The French frontier town on the Bay of Biscay in the
Basses-Pyrenees, known for the manufacture of a liqueur of the same
name. French Custom-house; station on the line between Bordeaux and
Madrid. Good beach and bathing. Boats can be hired to cross the
Bidassoa to Fuenterabia, at about 2 frs. for 3 persons; for information
concerning which see Chapter XIII.

Buffet at the station.

Money changed.

Hotels/.--De France, Du Commerce, Americani.

IRUN.--The Spanish frontier town and railway station on the
direct line between Bordeaux and Spain. Spanish Customhouse.

Buffet at the station, also a money changer.

Hotels.--Echenique, De Arupe.

IZESTE.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, near Louvie-Juzon and
Arudy, on the road between Eaux Bonnes and Oloron.

JACA.--A fortified town of Spain on the banks of the Aragon,
521/2 miles from Oloron, on the direct route to Huesca, from
which it is 571/2 miles distant.

LABASSERE.--A village in the Hautes-Pyrenees, celebrated for its
waters and slate quarries (refer to Bagneres de Bigorre). It is 11/2
hrs. distant from Bigorre; but its quarries take 1/2 hr. longer to
reach, and the springs 1 hour after that. The celebrated water is
bottled at the springs, but it is also sent in casks for use in
Bagneres de Bigorre.

LAMOTHE.--A small village in the Landes, 25 miles from Bordeaux.
Junction for Arcachon, 10 miles distant.

LARUNS.--An important though tumble-down village in the Val
d'Ossau, in the Basses-Pyrenees, 31/4 miles from Eaux Bonnes and the
same from Eaux Chaudes. The railway from Pau now extends to Laruns, 24
miles (see Chapter XII.), but the drive is more enjoyable, except on a
dusty day. The picturesque costumes of the Ossau valley may still be
seen occasionally at this village.

Hotels.--Des Touristes, Des Pyrenees. Living economical.

LESCAR.--An ancient and decaying town, 41/2 miles from Pau by
rail. Several interesting ruins, &c., for which refer to Chapter I.

LOURDES.--A town in the Hautes-Pyrenees, and railway station on
the direct line from Pau to Toulouse, and junction with the line to
Pierrefitte. The great Roman Catholic Pilgrimage, having now quite
eclipsed Betharram, much visited formerly as a shrine. The grotto where
the Virgin is supposed to have appeared is by the riverside. An
admirable panorama represents the scene at one of these imaginary
apparitions of the Virgin--known as Notre Dame de Lourdes, and always
represented in that connection with a blue sash. Five and twenty years
and superstition have transformed Lourdes from a little village into a
fair-sized town, overloaded with hotels, of which the traveller is
advised to be wary, especially during the pilgrim season, when the beds
are apt to have other occupants than the "weary traveller's form." The
Hotel des Pyrenees may be trusted.

Hotels.--Des Pyrenees || (Mons. R. Lacrampe); Latapie; De la
Grotte, De la Poste, De Paris, De l'Europe, De la Paix, D'Angleterre,
&c.

Excellent Carriages on hire in the town and at the hotels.

Excursions to the Lac de Lourdes, &c.

LOURES (1445 ft.).--A village in the Hautes-Pyrenees, 17 1/2
miles from Luchon and 3 from St. Bertrand de Comminges (see Chapter
XI.), for which it is the station on the railway between Luchon and
Montrejeau, and carriages await trains.

Hotels.--Pyrenees, Lassus.

LOUVIE-JUZON.--A village in the Val d'Ossau, Basses-Pyrenees, 16
miles from Pau, n. from Eaux Bonnes, and less than a mile from the
ruins of the ancient castle of Geloz. There is a curious old church in
the village, and the inn where the diligence daily halts is known as
the Hotel des Pyrenees.

LOUVIE SOUBIBON.--A small village at the foot of a mountain
worked for its slates, 4 miles from the above.

LUZ (2410 ft.).--A well-situated village in a fertile valley in
the Hautes-Pyrenees, 6 1/4 miles from Pierrefitte, the terminus of the
line to Lourdes, 1 1/4 from St. Sauveur, and 3 3/4 from Bareges. From
the last-named it receives water for its new Bathing Establishment (see
Bareges in Appendix).

Hotels.--De l'Univers, || Des Pyrenees, De l'Europe, &c.

Apartments may also be obtained. Living is not on the whole
expensive, but from July to September from 10 to 16 frs. may be
charged--much less at other times (say from 7 to 10).

Carriages and Horses, Asses and Guides can be
obtained for the various excursions (for which see St. Sauveur in
Appendix).

Post and Telegraph Office.

For description of the old Church of the Templars and the Chateau St.
Marie, &c., refer to Chapter VI. MAULEON-BAROUSSE.--In the
valley of Barousse, Hautes-Pyrenees, 3 1/4 miles from Salechan, on the
line between Montrejeau and Luchon; 4 1/2 miles from Ste. Marie (not to
be confounded with the Ste. Marie near Bigorre).

Inn.--M. Grillon's.

MOLITG-les-Bains (1480 ft.).--Built on a terrace above the
Castellane Gorge in the Pyrenees Orientales, 5-1/2 miles from Prades
and 31 from Perpignan.

The Bathing Establishments (of which there are three) are
situated a mile below the village, in the gorge, and they are supplied
by 10 springs of a similar nature, largely charged with sulphate of
soda, and of temperatures varying from 88 deg. to 100 deg. Fahr. The
water has emollient and sedative properties, slightly diuretic, and is
especially useful in diseases of the skin and nerves.

The Climate is very mild in winter, but hot in summer; and the
season extends from May to October.

Hotels.--The best accommodation is to be had at the bathing
establishments Barrere, Llupia, and Massia, all of which belong to M.
Massia, who is a doctor by profession.

Chief Excursions are:--

To Olette by the Gourgs de Nohedes (11 hours there and back).

To the Baths of Carcanieres (about 11 hours there _only_)
_via_ Mosset.

MONTAUBAN.--A village in the Hautes-Pyrenees, 1-1/2 miles from
Luchon (see Chapter X.), known for its church and cascade.

MONTGAILLARD.--A village on the banks of the Adour, in the
Hautes-Pyrenees, 5 miles from Bigorre: station on the line between
Bigorre and Tarbes.

MONTREJEAU.--A town standing on an eminence above the river in
the Haute-Garonne, junction for Luchon from the Pau-Toulouse line.

Hotels.--Leclair (fine situation); Pouget, well-known; &c.

Buffet at the station. Refer to Chapter XI. for further
information.

MORCENZ.--A town in the "Landes" district, 68 miles from
Bordeaux, and junction for the Tarbes-Bigorre line. There is a small
bathing establishment in the town, supplied by a cold chalybeate
spring; and a quarry of lithographic stone in the neighbourhood.

Buffet at station.

Inns.--Commerce, Ambassadeurs.

NAY.--An ancient village in the Basses-Pyrenees, on the left
bank of the Gave de Pau. Station, Coarraze-Nay, on the line from
Pau to Lourdes; 10-1/2 miles from the former and 14 from the latter.
Tanneries, &c., and ancient buildings. See Chapter I.

Inns.--Du Commerce, De France.

NEGRESSE.--The station for Biarritz (2 miles from the town), on
the direct line between Bordeaux and Madrid.

NESTALAS.--A village in the Hautes-Pyrenees, near Pierrefitte;
the station being known as Pierrefitte-Nestalas, the terminus of the
line from Lourdes. Hotel accommodation at Pierrefitte (which see in
Appendix).

OLORON.--A town on a hill above the river of same name, in the
Basses-Pyrenees, 20 miles from Pau, by Gan and Belair. Its suburb
(across the river) Sainte Marie possesses a fine old church of the
Transition style. The railway was to be opened this year (1883) in
communication with Pau and Laruns. Oloron is celebrated for some
exquisite pottery, that can be bought in all the chief Pyrenean resorts
_except_ the town itself.

Hotels.--De la Poste, Des Voyageurs, De l'Aigle.

Oo.--A small village with an ancient church, in the
Haute-Garonne, 5-1/2 miles from Luchon, and 4-1/2 from the lake of the
same name.

Guide.--Jean Brunet.

ORTHEZ.--An ancient town situated on a hill above the Gave de
Pau, in the Basses-Pyrenees. The Tour de Moncade, in the vicinity, has
great historic interest, besides which there is an ancient bridge and
other remains of olden days (see Chapter I.). Coach to Salies (10
miles), and Mauleon-Licharre (27 miles).

Inns.--De la Belle-hotesse, Des Pyrenees, &c.

PAILLOLE (or Payole).--A village in the Hautes-Pyrenees, 11-1/4
miles from Bigorre, on the Route Thermale, _via_ the Col de
Peyresourde to Luchon. See Chapters I. and IX.

Inn.--De la Poste.

PANTICOSA.--A village in Spain, 24 miles from Cauterets,
celebrated for its waters. The bathing establishments are fed by four
springs of the sulphurous type. They are variously used for dyspepsia,
rheumatism, skin diseases, scrofula, and chronic (non-tubercular)
chest affections. They have a purgative and sedative action.

Hotels.--Accommodation can be best obtained in the nine
different bathing establishments belonging to the same proprietor;
there are also the D'Espagne and FrancoEspagnol.

Horses.--At about 5 to 7 francs per diem, at the Maison Borda.

Doctors.--Attached to the establishments.

PASAGES.--A village on the shores of a tidal bay in Spain, 30
miles from Bayonne and 6-1/4 from Irun. It was once the safest port in
the Biscay. Refer to Chapter XIII.

PAU (770 ft.).--A former capital, and most important town on the
right bank of the Gave of same name, in the Basses-Pyrenees. A
favourite winter resort with English and Americans, possessing hotels,
markets, and shops of the best and most varied descriptions. An
excellent starting-point for a tour in the Pyrenees. For history, &c.,
see Chapter I.

Hotels.--France, || Poste, || Gassion, De la Paix, Splendide
Bellevue, Beau Sejour, || Grand Continental, De Londres, Henri IV., &c.

Pensions.--Colbert, || Hattersly, Etcherbest, Lecour, &c.

Apartments.--All over the town.

Season.--1st of October to end of May.

Villas. Can be hired furnished, for the season, at prices
varying from L8 per month to L80.

Baths.--Rue Alexander Taylor, and 13 Rue d'Orleanb, &c.

Carriage Proprietors.--Ranguedat, || Crohare, || &c. Lc.

Horse Proprietors.--Estrade, || Peiho, || Lanusse.

T-Carts and Good Ponies.--Schuerch, Rue de la Fontaine.

English Churches.--Trinity Church, Rue des Temples; Christ
Church, Rue Serviez; St Andrew's Church, Rue Calas; Presbyterian
Church, Rue Montpensier.

Bankers.--Merillon, || will take English cheques, &c.; Mr.
Church, English Vice-Consul; Mr. M. Clay, U. S. ViceConsul; Tricou, &c.

Post and Telegraph Office, Reading--Rooms, Theatre, Casino,
&c.

English Club.--Place Royale.

For the principal Excursions and sports and pastimes, refer to
Chapter I.; for trips to Eaux Bonnes and Eaux Chaudes, refer to Chapter
XIII.

PAYOLE.--See Paillole in Appendix.

PERPIGNAN.--A large town on the river Tet, in the Pyrenees
Orientales, junction for Prades (station for Vernet), from the Toulouse
line and starting-point of the coach for Amelie; 132 miles from
Toulouse, 25 1/2 from Prades, 29 1/2 from Molitg, 32 1/2 from Vernet,
and 23 1/2 from Amelie. It is fortified; celebrated for its garnet
jewellery; and situated in a valley covered with groves of olive and
pomegranate, and fruitful vineyards. Cathedral; chateau (splendid view
from donjon tower) in the Citadol, entrance i fr.; theatre, Picture
Gallery, &c.

Hotels.--Grand, De France, De l'Europe, Du Petit Paris, &c.

Post and Telegraph Office.

The Chief Excursions are:--

La Salanque, the whole day, by carriage _via_ St. Laurent
de la Salanque; Torreilles; Ste. Marie and Villelongue de la Salanque.

Castell Rossello et Canet.--6 1/4 miles; carriage-road part of
the way.

PEYREHORADE.--Village in the Landes, and station on the line
between Puyoo (13 miles) and Bayonne (19 miles).

Inns.--Lafond Des Voyageurs.

PIERREFITTE.[Footnote: The station is called
Pierrefitte-Nestalas.]--A village situated at the foot of the Pic de
Soulom and the Gorge de Cauterets in the Hautes Pyrenees. Terminus of
the railway line from Lourdes, and starting-point for the diligences to
Cauterets, Luz, St. Sauveur, and Bareges.

Hotels.--De la Poste, || Des Pyrenees, De France. Living more
moderate than at any of the above-mentioned towns or Argeles. For
further information see Chapter IV.

PRESTE-LES-BAINS.--A bathing-resort in the Eastern Pyrenees, 19
miles from Amelie (to which refer in Appendix), and 42-1/2 from
Perpignan, the nearest railway station.

The Bathing Establishment is supplied by one sulphurous spring
only, partaking of much the same properties as the more celebrated ones
at the larger resorts, being specially beneficial, when drunk, for
lithiasis and catarrh of the bladder.

Hotel accommodation in the Bathing Establishment.

Season.--June to October.

PUYOO.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, one mile distant from
the station of same name; junction for Bayonne from the line between
Bordeaux and Pau; from which it is 11-1/2 miles and 32-1/2 miles
distant, respectively.

Hotels.--Lafont, Voyageurs.

REBENAC.--A village in the Val de Neez, Basses-Pyrenees, 10
miles from Pau, and 17-1/2 from Eaux Bonnes on the direct route,
between the two.

Inn.--Du Perigord.

SAINT AVENTIN (2805 ft.).--A village in the Haute-Garonne,
2-3/4 miles from Luchon, on the Route Thermale. Known for the chapel of
same name, to which a legend is attached.

SAINT BEAT.--A village in the Haute-Garonne, 3-1/4 miles from
Marignac, a station on the line between Luchon and Montrejeau, from
which it is 9-1/2 and 13 miles distant respectively. A favourite drive
from Luchon (see Chapter XI. and Luchon in Appendix), road to Viella
_via_ Bosost.

Inn.--Commerce.

SAINT BERTRAND DE COMMINGES.--An ancient Roman town in the
Haute-Garonne, 3 miles from Loures station on the Luchon-Montrejeau
line, For information respecting the old cathedral, &c., refer to
Chapter XI.

Inn.--De Comminges.

The Grotto de Gargas is in the vicinity. Guides must be hired at St.
Bertrand.

SAINT CHRISTAU.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, 5 miles from
Oloron, from which it is a lovely drive.

Two Bathing Establishments, fed by four sources, one of which is
calcareous, and the rest of a sulphurous nature. They are useful for
curing wounds, rheumatism, skin diseases, eczema, laryngitis, and
affections of the eyes.

Hotels.--Poste, Grand Turc, Mogul; also Chalets, and
rooms from 2 to 5 francs per diem.

There are many pleasant walks in the neighbourhood, and excellent
fishing.

SAINTE MARIE (pres Bigorre).--A village in the Campan valley,
Hautes-Pyrenees, at the fork of the Route Thermale from Bigorre (see
Chapter II.). It is distant 7-1/2 miles from Bigorre, 17-1/2 from
Bareges by the Col de Tourmalet route, and 36 from Luchon by the Col
d'Aspin.

SAINTE MARIE (pres Oloron).--A suburb of Oloron, on the opposite
bank of the river Aspe. See Oloron in Appendix.

SAINTE MARIE (pres St. Laurent).--A small village on a hill in
the Eastern Pyrenees, 2-1/2 miles from St. Laurent de la Salanque, and
7-1/2 from Perpignan.

SAINTE MARIE (pres Salechan).--A small bathing resort, situated
in a lovely valley in the Hautes-Pyrenees about 1 mile from Salechan
station on the Luchon-Montrejeau line.

The Bathing Establishment is supplied by four cold springs,
containing sulphate of lime principally, but also small quantities of
magnesia and soda. The water is heated for bathing purposes, but drunk
in its natural state. It is tonic in its action, but diuretic and
purgative as well, and is used efficaciously in liver complaints,
dyspepsia, neuralgia, and nervous irritability. Hotel accommodation
in the Bathing Establishment and Apartments in the houses near it.

SAINT JEAN DE LUZ.--A watering-place on the Bay of Biscay, in
the Basses-Pyrenees, 8 miles from Biarritz, which it is very anxious to
outrival. It is well protected from the winds, but is less free from
dampness in its climate on the same account. It possesses an old church
and several historical buildings, and is one of the favourite drives
from Biarritz. Refer to Chapter XIII.

Hotels.--De la Poste, De France, D'Angleterre et de la Plage, De
l'Ocean, De Madrid.

Apartments and Houses furnished in the town.

Sea-Bathing Establishment, Casino, &c.

SAINT LAURENT DE LA SALANQUE.--A town in the Eastern Pyrenees,
with a good agricultural and commercial industry, 8-3/4 miles from
Perpignan.

Hotels.--Got, Garriques.

SAINT MAMET.--A village in the Haute-Garonne, 3/4 mile from
Luchon (see Chapter X.). The church is interesting.

SAINT PE.--A village built on an eminence in the Hautes-Pyrenees,
and station on the railway between Pau and Lourdes, 18 miles from
the one and 6-1/4 from the other.

SAINT PEE-sur-Nivelles.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, on
the route between St. Jean de Luz and Cambo--8-3/4 miles from the
former, and 10 miles from the latter.

SAINT SAUVEUR (2525 ft.).--A bathing and mountain resort in the
Hautes-Pyrenees, 7 miles from Pierrefitte--the nearest station--1-1/4
from Luz, and 5 from Bareges. A most charming place for a spring or
summer residence, being beautifully situated and possessing numerous
pleasant walks in the vicinity. See Chapter VII.

Two Bathing Establishments, each supplied by one spring, in
which sulphuret of sodium predominates. The water is largely diuretic
in its action, having at the same time a tonic and anti-spasmodic
effect. Its sedative properties are beneficial to the nervous system
generally, and it proves useful in removing the after-effects of long
illnesses, haemorrhages, &c., besides being pleasant to the skin.

Hotels.--De France, || Des Bains, || Du Parc, Des Princes, De
Paris.

Guides (living at Luz).--Martin, Noguez, Fortanet, and Bernard
senior. For lofty summits, such as the Pic d'Ardiden, and for other
excursions, Lons, Pratdessus, and Cramp Brothers.

Horses may generally be obtained from them, and Carriages
(at Luz) as well.

Post and Telegraph during the season only, but letters
and telegrams are forwarded from Luz at other times, there being one
delivery and one collection of the former daily.

Chief Excursions:--

To Bareges.--10 to 15 frs. landau; 2 frs. pourboire. See Chapter
VI.

To Sazos and Grust.--See Chapter VII.

To Gavarnie.--Landau and four horses, 15 to 25 frs.; pourboire,
3 frs. Horses and guide to the Cirque, each 2 frs. from Gavarnie. See
Chapter VIII.

The Pic de Bergons.--4 frs. each horse, guide 5 frs. out of
season, 6 frs. each in season. Refer to Chapter VII.

The Pic de Viscos.--7 hours up and down. Guide 10 frs., horse 8
frs. Via Grust; a pleasant excursion.

Pic de Nere.--8 hours there and back. Horse 10 frs., guide 12
frs. Horse-track three-quarters of the way; an easy and pleasant climb.

Pic d'Ardiden.--8-1/2 hours up and down. Guide necessary. A fine
but difficult climb.

SAINT SAVIN.--A very ancient village in the Argeles valley, in
the Hautes-Pyrenees; fully described in Chapter IV.

SAINT SEBASTIEN.--A town in the north of Spain, on the shores of
the Biscay, 163-1/2 miles from Bordeaux, 35 from Biarritz, and 19 from
Hendaye (the French frontier town). Possessing a fine citadel,
bull-ring, beach, and bathing establishment, and two fine churches. See
Chapter XIII.

Hotels.--De Londres, || De Escurra, Anglais, De Arrese, De
Berdejo, &c.

SALECHAN.--A village in the Garonne valley, in the Hautes-Pyrenees,
and station on the Montrejeau-Luchon line for Ste. Marie (baths)
and Siradan (baths).

SALIES.--A town on the river of same name, in the Basses-Pyrenees,
10 miles from Orthez, the nearest station.

It is celebrated for its salt springs; and Bayonne hams are said to owe
their fine (?) flavour to the use of the salt produced from them.

Hotels.--Du Cheval Blanc, De France, De Paris.

SAZOS.--A small village near St. Sauveur, in the Hautes-Pyrenees,
below the hamlet of Grust. For description of church, &c., refer
to Chapter VII.

SIRADAN.--A small bathing resort in the valley of same name, in
the Hautes-Pyrenees, with a bathing establishment and hotel in one
building, 2 miles from Salechan station on the Luchon-Montrejeau line.
The springs contain sulphuret of lime and bicarbonate of iron. They
have a similar effect to those of Ste. Marie (1 mile distant), but tend
to excite more strongly. The water stands bottling well.

SOULOM.--A small village at the foot of the peak of same name,
in the Hautes-Pyrenees, near Pierrefitte, possessing a curious old
church. See Chapter IV.

TARBES.--A large town on the Adour, in the Hautes-Pyrenees.
Station on the railway between Pau and Toulouse, and junction for the
Bigorre and Morcenz lines. Cavalry barracks, cathedral, &c. Buffet at
the station. See Chapter III.

Hotels.--De la Paix, France, Commerce.

URRUGNE.--A village in the Basses-Pyrenees, 2-1/2 miles from St.
Jean de Luz.

USTARITZ.--The name of two villages, formerly separate, in the
Basses-Pyrenees, 8-3/4 miles from Bayonne, on the carriage-road thence
_via_ Elizondo to Pampeluna (63 miles).

VALCABRERE.--A small village in the Haute-Garonne, 2 miles from
Loures station on the Luchon-Montrejeau line, celebrated for the Church
of St. Just, a venerable pile in the vicinity.

VENASQUE.--A small and prosperous town in Spain, 9 hours from
Luchon (21 miles) by the _Port_ of the same name. There are some
baths similar in their uses to those of Luchon, fed by sulphurous
springs at some distance from the town, and 2-1/2 hours nearer Luchon.

Excellent accommodation can be obtained at the Casa san Mimi
(Antonio Saora) for travellers.

VERNET-LES-BAINS (2050 ft.), a bathing resort situated in a
hollow in the Eastern Pyrenees, 7 miles from the nearest railway
station.

There are several springs which supply the large Bathing
Establishment and the smaller Thermes Mercader. The water is
largely charged with sulphate of lime, and possesses properties similar
to other waters of that type. It is especially useful in affections of
the air-passages and skin complaints, and is more or less exciting
according to the springs. The climate is mild, and therefore Vernet has
some reputation as a winter resort, being very little colder than
Amelie (to which refer in Appendix).

Hotels.--Des Commandants (in the bathing establishment), Du
Parc, Ibrahim Pacha et des Bains, Du Canigou, &c.

Villas furnished to be let.

Carriages and Horses.

Post and Telegraph Office, Theatre, Clubs, &c.

Guide.--Michael Nou.

Chief Excursions:--

The Canigou (9144 ft.)--11 hours up and down. Guide
recommended, also provisions. Horses 10 frs., guide 10 frs. Horses can
go within a mile of the top, from which the view is splendid. The
ascent is long but not difficult.

The Fountain des Esquereyres.--_Via_ Castell, 1/2 hour; a
pleasant walk.

Tour de Goa.--4 hours up and down. An interesting battlemented
tower, with a fine view.

Vallee de Sahorre.--3 hours there and back; an enjoyable trip.

Cascade de Cadi.--6 hours there and back; guide recommended.

The Abbey of Canigou.--2-1/2 hours there and back; guide
unnecessary. An interesting ruin.

Vieuzac.--A suburb of Argeles, in the Hautes-Pyrenees,
possessing a donjon tower. The station on the line from Lourdes is
called Argeles-Vieuzac.

Villelongue.--A small village in the Argeles valley, in the
Hautes-Pyrenees, near Pierrefitte. See Chapter IV.




APPENDIX B

RAILWAY INFORMATION AND SKELETON ROUTES TO THE CHIEF RESORTS IN THE
PYRENEES.


For the ordinary traveller a "Continental Bradshaw" is as useful a
railway guide as any, especially if his knowledge of French is limited,
but the time tables published by Chaix and Cie. are also most excellent
in every way. Of these the best and most expensive is the "Livret-Chaix
Continental," price 2 frs, containing all continental railways and a
complete index. A cheaper time table is the "Indicateur des Chemins de
Fer," published by the same firm, price 1/2 fr., which gives the French
railways only, with map and index. Besides these, all the principal
lines have time tables of their own, price 30 cents.

It is advisable, when people are travelling as a party, that they
should have their luggage all weighed together, presenting the whole of
the tickets at the same time; this not only frequently saves expense,
but, as the number of persons is marked by the luggage clerk on their
baggage receipt, it is a guarantee that each has bought a ticket, which
saves trouble if one should happen to be lost.

When people are stopping the night _en route_ at a place, and do
not wish to take their registered luggage to the hotel, only to have to
bring it back for re-registration next day, they have simply to leave
it in the station, and when starting again on the morrow to tell the
porter--when they give him the baggage ticket--that it was left
overnight (for which the charge is 1d. per package), whereupon he will
register it without further trouble.

If a ticket is taken for the wrong station (by mistake) and the luggage
is accordingly registered wrongly too, the passenger must represent the
same to the station-master and ask him to allow a change to be made; if
there is not time to do this the luggage clerk may take the
responsibility--if the urgency of the case is made _argentiferously_
clear--but the plan is not recommended. _It is important
to know_ that if a traveller misses his train he _must present_
his _ticket_ at the ticket office to be _restamped_ in order
to make it again available--otherwise it is liable to be forfeited.

Travellers will also save themselves much trouble by settling which
hotel they intend to go to, before arriving at their destination; and
it must be fully understood that for the carrying of small parcels
taken into the carriage, the aid of porters can _never_ be counted
on. See Chapter XI.

Luggage not exceeding 30 kilogrammes (_i.e._ 66 lbs. Eng.) is
carried free; 1d. being charged for the registration thereof.

      *       *       *       *       *

_Routes from London to Paris._

_Route_ 1.--_Via_ Dover, Calais, Montreuil, Abbeville, Amiens,
Claremont, and Creil: the quickest route.

_Route_ 2.--_Via_ Folkestone, Boulogne, Montreuil, &c. as above.

_Route_ 3.--_Via_ Newhaven, Dieppe, Rouen, Gaillon, Mantes, and
Poissy: the least expensive route.

_From Liverpool to Bordeaux._

_Route_ 4.--Per Pacific Steam Navigation Co.'s steamers, fortnightly,
sailing on Wednesdays; average passage 2-1/2 days.

_From London to Bordeaux._

_Route_. 5.--Per General Steam Navigation Co.'s steamers, average
passage 3 to 4 days.

_Route_ 6.--_Via_ Weymouth, Cherbourg, Caen, Alencon, Le Mans,
Tours and Angouleme. _From Paris to Bordeaux._

_Route_ 7.--_Via_ Orleans, Blois, St. Pierre les Corps (for
Tours), Poitiers, Angouleme, and Libourne.

_From Paris to Bagneres de Bigorre._

_Route_ 8.--_Via_ Orleans, Nexon, Perigueux, Les Eyzies, Libos, Agen,
Lectoure, Auch, Mirande, and Tarbes: the most direct route from
Paris to the Pyrenees.

_From Paris to Toulouse._

_Route_ 9.--_Via_ Issoudun, Argenton, Limoges, Nexon, Brives,
Rocamadour, Assier, Figeac, Villefranche, and Tessonieres: the quickest
and best route for the Pyrenees Orientales, and resorts of Vernet,
Amelie, &c.

_From Bordeaux to Arcachon_.

_Route_ 10.--_Via_ Gazinet, Facture, Lamothe, and La Teste.

_From Bordeaux to Bagneres de Bigorre_.

_Route_ 11.--_Via_ Morcenx, Arjuzaux, Arengosse, Mont de Marsan,
Aire, Vic-Bigorre, Tarbes, Salles, Adour, and Montgaillard: a
longer route from Paris, by a few miles only, than Route 8.


_From Bordeaux to Biarritz_.

_Route_ 12.--_Via_ Ychoux, Morcenx, Dax, Saint Geours, and
Bayonne.

_From Bordeaux to Pau_.

_Route 13_.--_Via_ Ychoux, Morcenx, Dax, Puyoo, Orthez, Lacq,
and Lescar.

_From Pau to Eaux Bonnes and Eux Chaudes_. _Route_ 14.--By
carriage _via_ Gan, Louvie-Juzon, and Laruns.

_Route_ 15.--By rail _via_ Gan and Laruns, [Footnote: This
railway was to be opened this year (1883).] and carriage from Laruns.

_From Pau to Lourdes_.

_Route_ 16.--_Via_ Coarraze-Nay, Montaut-Betharram, and St.
Pe.

_From Pau to Oloron_.

_Route_ 17.--_Via_ Gan and Belair.

_From Lourdes to Argeles_.

_Route_ 18.--_Via_ Soum, Lugagnan, and Boo-Silhen.

_From Lourdes to Pierrefitte_.

_Route_ 19.--_Via_ Soum, Lugagnan, Boo-Silhen and Argeles.

_From Lourdes to Cauterets, Luz, St. Sauveur, Bareges, and
Gavarnie_.

_Route_ 20.--By Route 19 to Pierrefitte, thence by diligence or
private carriage to Cauterets.

_Route_ 21.--By Route 19 to Pierrefitte, thence by diligence or
private carriage to Luz.

_Route_ 22.--By Route 19 to Pierrefitte, thence by similar
conveyances to St. Sauveur.

_Route_ 23.--By Route 21 to Luz and continuation to Bareges.

_Route_ 24.--By Route 22 to St. Sauveur and continuation to
Gavarnie.

_From Bagneres de Bigorre to Bareges_.

_Route_ 25.--By carriage _via_ Ste. Marie, Gripp, Tramesaigues,
and the Col de Tourmalet. This route is only open in midsummer.

_From Bagneres de Bigorre to Bagneres de Luchon_.

_Route_ 26.--By carriage _via_ Campan, Ste. Marie, Payole,
Col d'Aspin, Arreau, Borderes, Col de Peyresourde, and Garin.
Considered the finest drive in the Pyrenees.

_Route_ 27.--By rail _via_ Montgaillard, Tarbes, Montrejeau,
Salechan, Marignac, and Luchon. An exceedingly long round.

_From Bagneres de Luchon to St. Bertrand de Comminges_.

_Route_ 27.--By carriage _via_ Cier, Marignac, Salechan,
Loures, and Labroquere.

_Route_ 28.--By train _via_ Marignac and Salechan to Loures,
and carriage thence to St. Bertrand. The rail continues from Loures to
Montrejeau.

_From St. Bertrand to Montrejeau_.

_Route_ 29.--By carriage to Loures station, thence by train to
Montrejeau.

_Route_ 30.--By carriage direct to Montrejeau.

_From Toulouse to Perpignan_.

_Route_ 31.--Via Castelnaudary, Carcassone, Narbonne, La Nouvelle,
Salses, and Rivesaltes.

_From Perpignan to Amelie-les-Bains_.

_Route_ 32.--By diligence or carriage _via_ Pollestres, Le
Boulou, and Le Pont de Ceret.

_From Perpignan to Molitg_.

_Route_ 33.--By rail _via_ Millas, Ille, Bouleternere, and
Vinca, to Prades, thence by diligence or carriage _via_ Catlar to
Molitg.

_From Perpignan to Vernet_.

_Route_ 34--Route 33 to Prades and coach to Vernet.

_Route_ 35--By rail _via_ Prades to Villefranche, and carriage
thence to Vernet.




APPENDIX C.

SOME LOCAL PYRENEAN TERMS AND THEIR ENGLISH EQUIVALENTS.


_Artigue_, pasturage, prairie.
_Barranque_, a deep hollow or ravine.
_Borde, Bourdette_, farm-house, barn, cot.
_Caire, Quaire, Quairat_, a cone-shaped peak, rocky and bare.
_Canaou_, narrow ravine worn by the snow.
_Cap_, mountain tip.
_Clot_, a valley without exit.
_Colline_, a small valley, a dale.
_Cortal, Courtaou_, sheep-fold, sheep-pen.
_Couila, Couillade_, shepherd's cabin, hut, fertile vale.
_Estibe_, pasturage, feeding-ground.
_Estibere_, a well-pastured mountain.
_Fitte_, pointed summit.
_Montagne_, feeding-ground (on a mountainside).
_Neste_, mountain torrent.
_Orrhy, Orri_, shepherd's hut.
_Oule_, a bowl-shaped valley.
_Pech, Pouey, Puy_, a mountain of no great height, in the Western
   Pyrenees; but also applied to loftier summits, in the Eastern range.
_Pene, Pena, Penne_, pointed rock.
_Peyre_, a large crag.
_Piche, Pisse_, a cascade waterfall.
_Pinede, Pinade_, pine forest, site of pine forest.
_Pique_, synonymous with _Fitte_, pointed summit, peak.
_Pla, Plan_, a valley with level meadows.
_Prade, Pradere_, similar to _Estibe_,
feeding-ground, meadow.
_Raillere_, steep decline, avalanche channel.
_Roque_, a mountain, steep and covered with crags.
_Sarrat, Serre, Serrere_, a sharp-toothed crest, backbone of
   mountain.
_Sarre_, a small hill.
_Seoube, Scube_, wood, forest.
_Tausse, Truc, Truque, Tuc_, a steep and lofty peak with large
   buttresses.

The _Defiles_ and _Passes_ of the mountains for which the word
_Col_ is generally applied, bear many other names, of which the
following, with their special significations, are the chief:--

_Core_, a pass on a side range or small lateral chain.
_Fourgue, Fourquette, Hourque, Hourquette_, generally applied to
   passes on the small side ranges.
_Pas_, a pass difficult of approach.
_Port_, a pass in the principal chain.
_Porteil, Portillon, Pourtet_, passes in the principal or side chains.




APPENDIX D.

GENERAL INFORMATION, AND TABLES OF METRES, GRAMMES, DEGREES, &c. &c.


It would be difficult to speak with _too_ much weight on the
subject of _bread_, especially where invalids are concerned, and
that article in the Pyrenees is essentially _bad_--we might almost
say _unfit for food_. With the exception of Bagneres de
Bigorre--and then only when specially ordered--and _in the
season_, Bagneres de Luchon, the bread throughout the mountain
resorts is abominably sour. Travellers _do_ eat it, because they
have no other, but to invalids it is positively nauseous. In our
opinion it is the only real drawback to enjoying a Pyrenean trip! But
it would be foolish to bring it into such prominence when we have all
along recommended a stay amid these lovely scenes, unless we could
suggest a remedy, and the remedy is as simple as, with us, it proved
complete. There are several bakers in Pau selling bread as good as one
could wish for, and doubtless any of these would be glad to meet the
wishes of travellers; in our case we addressed ourselves to Mr. Otto
Kern, Vienna Bakery, Rue de la Prefecture, Pau, requesting him to
supply us with a certain quantity of bread daily, at whatever place we
might be. We had previously decided on our route on broad lines, so
that a postcard as a rule was sufficient to give notice of a change in
our address; while if a sudden alteration occurred in our plans, a
half-franc telegram told him the news, and _our bread_ never
failed to be at the _right_ place on the _right day_. The
bread sufficient for four people, carriage thereof, and a trifle for
commission (i.e. paper and trouble) cost on an average 2 frs. 50 cents
per diem, which was a little over 80 centimes each. Perhaps in time
hotel-keepers will resort to this method; in fact, we were assured that
it would be so; but in the meantime every traveller is recommended to
do so on his own account; though in all other respects he will find
most of the hotels throughout the mountains very well found. When once
in the Pyrenees, after Pau had been left behind, we found an average
price of 10 frs. per day--perhaps a shade less--was what our hotel
expenses amounted to; including--coffee and milk, bread and butter,
eggs _or_ kidneys _or_ chops for the first breakfast; table
d'hote luncheon and table d'hote dinner, with a good bedroom not higher
than 2nd floor. These prices must be understood as only those of a
spring or autumn tour--_out of the season_--and rather easier than
a traveller would pay at many of the hotels if he arrived without
having previously written and made terms. _We_ invariably wrote,
and at all the hotels marked thus || received every attention, good
rooms, good food, and _dry beds_.

It is difficult to give a hard-and-fast amount per diem as to
expenditure, as it depends so much on the drives, excursions, &c.; as
above stated 10 frs. per day paid all hotel expenses (including _vin
ordinaire_), and we consider that in the spring, with several
excursions, and "a landau and four" for the principal drives--such as
Bigorre to Luchon, Lourdes to St. Sauveur, St. Sauveur to Gavarnie, &c.
&c.--25 frs. or L1 per day ought to cover the whole daily expense of
each person. In the summer of course 35 frs., or even 40 frs., would be
required for the same period. Horses and carriages are cheap in the
spring, but even then a little judicious bargaining is required, as it
is in nearly every transaction, in the Pyrenees.

Jam, marmalade, bloater-paste, and small luxuries of that kind, not
excluding _whiskey_, are difficult to obtain, and it is well to
take them all from Pau or Biarritz, wherever the start is made.
Bagneres de Bigorre, chez M. Peltier, is fairly well supplied, but
other resorts know not the sound of their names! It is also worth
knowing that a system of "Parcels Post" is in operation, whereby any
moderate-sized parcel can be dispatched from any station for 85 cents,
and delivered at any place within reach of the railway or diligence;
but it must be understood at the same time that _bread_ will in
like manner be delivered _only_ where the railway or diligence
runs; if travellers therefore go to places where there is no
_official_ communication, they must depute some agent to receive
letters or parcels where the diligence last stops, and then forward
them by special messenger. This can be done of course, but it will
prove costly.

The rate of postage is 2-1/2d. the 15 grammes (a shade over 1/2 oz.),
and 2-1/2d. for every additional 15 grammes.

Money orders are issued at all the principal towns to which (see
Appendix A) a post-office belongs.

Telegrams, 1/2 d = 5 cents, per word, the address being charged for the
same as the rest; but no telegram can cost less than 50 centimes.

The rate to England is variable; usually 2-1/2 d. per word.

Money is reckoned at 25 frs. to the L1 English, and banknotes or gold
will be accepted in nearly all hotels, and circular notes as well, at
the larger resorts.


TABLE OF LITRES AND PINTS.

1/2 litre  = 7/8 pint.
1    "     = 1-3/4 pints.
2  litres  = 3-1/2 pints.
4    "     = 7 pints.
8    "     = 7 quarts.


TABLES OF GRAMMES AND OUNCES.

  29 grammes =      1 oz.
  57    "    =      2 oz.
  86    "    =      3 oz.
 114    "    =      4 oz. = 1/4 lb.
 227    "    =      8 oz. = 1/2 lb.
 454    "    =     16 oz. =   1 lb.
 908    "    =     32 oz. =   2 lbs.
1000    "    = 35-1/5 oz. =   2 lbs. 3-1/5 oz.
1 kilogramme = 1000 grammes = 2 lbs. 3-1/5 oz.


TABLE OF CENTIMETRES AND INCHES.

100 centimetres = 1 metre = 39-1/3 inches; 1 centimetre = 2/5 inch
as near as possible.

  5 centimetres =  2    inches.
 10     "       =  4       "
 15     "       =  6       "
 20     "       =  8       "
 25     "       = 10       "
 30     "       = 12       "    = 1 foot.
 45     "       = 18       "    = 1-1/2 feet.
 50     "       = 20       "    = 1 ft. 8 in.
 60     "       = 24       "    = 2 feet.
 90     "       = 36       "    = 3 feet.
100     "       = 39-1/3   "    = 3 ft. 3-1/3 in.


TABLE OF METRES AND FEET, FOR DETERMINING THE
HEIGHT OF MOUNTAINS, &c.

1 metre = 3 ft. 3-1/3 in. as near as possible, without using decimals;
but at this computation 2 inches are lost in every 25 metres, which
however have been duly supplied in the following table, but the
fractions omitted:--

Metres. Ft. in.      Metres. Ft. in.         Metres.    Ft.   in..
   1 =  3    3          26 = 85   4            140 =    459    4
   2 =  6    7          27 = 88   7            150 =    492    2
   3 =  9   10          28 = 91  10            160 =    524   11
   4 =  13   1          29 = 95   2            170 =    557    9
   5 =  16   5          30 = 98   8            175 =    574    3
   6 =  19   8          35 = 114 10            180 =    590    7
   7 =  22  11          40 = 131  2            190 =    623    4
   8 =  26   3          45 = 147  7            200 =    656    3
   9 =  29   6          50 = 164  1            300 =    984    4
  10 =  32   9          55 = 180  5            400 =  1,312    6
  11 =  36   1          60 = 196 10            500 =  1,640    7
  12 =  39   4          65 = 213  3            600 =  1,968    8
  13 =  42   7          70 = 229  7            700 =  2,296    9
  14 =  45  11          75 = 246  1            800 =  2,624   10
  15 =  49   2          80 = 262  6            900 =  2,953    0
  16 =  52   5          85 = 278 10          1,000 =  3,281    1
  17 =  55   9          90 = 295  3          2,000 =  6,562    2
  18 =  59   0          95 = 311  8          3,000 =  9,843    3
  19 =  62   3         1OO = 328  2          3,100 = 10,171    5
  20 =  65   7         105 = 344  6          3,200 = 10,499    6
  21 =  68  10         110 = 360 11          3,300 = 10,827    7
  22 =  72   1         115 = 377  4          3,400 = 11,155    8
  23 =  75   5         120 = 393  8          3,500 = 11,483    9
  24 =  78   8         125 = 410  2          4,000 = 13,124    4
  25 =  82   0         130 = 426  6


TABLE OF KILOMETRES AND MILES.

1 kilometre = 1,000 metres = 1,093 yards = 5/8 mile, as nearly as
possible, without employing decimals; but at this computation the
kilometre gains 11 yards, 40 kilometres gain 1/4 mile, and 160
kilometres gain 1 mile. This gain has been deducted in the following
table, and all fractions less than 1/4 omitted:--

Kilos.  Miles.     Kilos.  Miles.

  1  =  5/8          19  =  11-3/4
  2  =  1-1/4        20  =  12-1/4
  3  =  2            30  =  18-1/2
  4  =  2-1/2        40  =  24-3/4
  5  =  3            50  =  31
  6  =  3-3/4        60  =  37
  7  =  4-1/4        70  =  43-1/4
  8  =  5            80  =  55-3/4
  9  =  5-1/2       100  =  62
 10  =  6-1/4       120  =  74-1/4
 11  =  7           160  =  99
 12  =  7-1/2       200  =  123-3/4
 13  =  8           300  =  185-1/2
 14  =  8-3/4       320  =  198
 15  =  9-1/4       400  =  247-1/2
 16  =  10          500  =  309-1/4
 17  =  10-1/2    1,000  =  618-3/4
 18  =  11-1/4


COMPARISON TABLE OF THE CENTIGRADE AND FAHRENHEIT THERMOMETERS.

1 deg. Centigrade = 1-4/5 Fahr.; 5 deg. Cent. = 9 deg. Fahr. It must
be understood that, as the freezing-point of Centigrade is Zero and of
Fahrenheit 32 deg., these 32 deg. must be taken into account in all
calculations above freezing-point: thus +5 deg. Cent. are equivalent
to a temperature of 41 deg. Fahr.

       Cent.    Fahr.              Cent.    Fahr.

Below  -15     = +3                 17     = 63
Zero.  -10     = +12                18     = 64
        -5     = +21                19     = 65
         0     = 32 Freezing-point. 20     = 67
         1     = 34                 25     = 76
         2     = 36                 30     = 85
         3     = 37                 35     = 94
         4     = 39                 35-1/2 = 95 Blood heat.
         5     = 41                 40     = 103
         6     = 43                 45     = 112
         7     = 45                 50     = 121
         8     = 47                 55     = 130
         9     = 48                 60     = 139
        10     = 50                 65     = 148
        11     = 52                 70     = 156
        12     = 54                 75     = 165
        13     = 55                 80     = 174
        13-1/2 = 56 Temperate.      85     = 183
        14     = 57                 90     = 192
        15     = 59                 95     = 201
        16     = 61                100     = 210 Boiling-point.





INDEX.


A.

Abbe's song, the,
A dirty avalanche,
A "double stroke" (St. Sauveur),
Adour, basin of,
Allee d'Etigny (Luchon),
  de Barcugna,
  des Bains,
  Verte (Bareges),
Allees de Cambasque,
Amelie-les-Bains,
  excursions from,
  general information,
  hotels at, &c.,
Amoy, Valley of Ten Thousand Rocks,
Ancient church of the Templars (Luz),
_Anemone vernalis_,
  scarlet,
  wood,
A new "diet of worms,"
An excited dog-fancier,
An extraordinary detachment,
Anglet,
Appendix A,
  B,
  C,
  D,
Aran, valley of,
Arboust, valley of,
Arcachon,
Arcachon, excursions from,
  general information,
  hotels at,
Argeles,
  drive round valley of,
  excursions from,
  hotels at,
  valley of,
Argeles-sur-Mer,
Arles-sur-Tech,
Arlos,
Arreau,
  hotels at and excursions from,
Arrens,
  excursions from,
  hotels at,
Arrieuze (river),
Arroudet, cascade of,
Artigues-Tellin,
Arudy,
Ascent of the Col de Riou,
Ascent of the Pic de Bergons,
Aspe, valley of,
Aspin,
  col of,
Asphodel,
Assat,
Aste,
Atalaya, cape,
Auberge du Lys (Luchon),
Auch, road of,
Aure, valley of,
Avajan,
Avalanche, a dirty,
Avenue de Salut,
Ax, road of,

B.

Bagneres de Bigorre to Bagneres de Luchon
Bagneres de Luchon to Bareges
Bagneres de Bigorre
Bagneres de Bigorre, bathing establishment of
Bagneres de Bigorre, excursions from
Bagneres de Bigorre, hotels of
Bagneres de Bigorre, springs of
Bagneres de Luchon to Montrejeau
Bagneres de Luchon to St. Bertrand de Comminges
Bagneres de Luchon
Bagneres de Luchon, baths of
Bagneres de Luchon, casino of
Bagneres de Luchon, excursions from
Bagneres de Luchon, general information
Bagneres de Luchon, hotels at
Ballooning
Barbe de Bouch
Bareges
  "      bathing establishment of
  "      excursions from
  "      hotels of
Barousse, valley of
Basin of Adour
  "      Echez
Baths of Amelie
  "      Bareges
  "      Capvern
  "      Cesar
  "      Grand Pre
  "      Hontalade
  "      Le Pre
  "      Luchon
  "      Luz
  "      Marie Therese
  "      Mauhourat
  "      Molitg
  "      OEufs
  "      Panticosa
  "      Pauze Nouveaux
  "        "   Vieux
  "      Petit St. Sauveur
  "      Preste
  "      Raillere
  "      Ste. Marie (near Luchon)
  "      St. Sauveur
  "      Salut
  "      Sante
  "      Siradan
  "      Vernet
Baudean
Bayonne
  "      general information
  "      hotels at
Beaucens, castle of
Bedat
Bee orchids
Behobie
Belesten
Bernadette Soubirons
Betharram
  "      bridge near
Betpouey (Bareges)
Biarritz
  "      amusements of
  "      Cape Atalaya at
  "      general information
  "      hotels at
  "      Port Vieux at
Bidart
Bidassoa
Bielle
Bilheres
Billeres (Pau)
Billeres plains of,
  " woods of,
Bious-Artigues,
Bishop's arrival, the,
Bizanos,
Black Forest (Bosost),
Black Prince,
Boo-Silhen,
Bordeaux to Arcachon,
Bordeaux to Bagneres de Bigorre,
Bordeaux to Biarritz,
  " to Pau,
Bordeaux,
  " hotels at,
  " steamers to,
  " trains to,
Borderes,
Bosost,
  " chapel of St. Antoine at,
  " church of,
  " Fonda (inn) d'Espana at,
Box plants,
Brada (mountain),
Bread,
  " arrival of,
Breche d'Allanz,
  " Fausse,
  " de Roland,
Broussette, valley of,
Bue,
Bugaret (mountain),
  " torrent of,
Burbe, valley of,
Burnished toes,
Butte du Tresor,
Buvette de Minvieille,

C.

Cabaliros, the,
Cabanes du Lys,
Cagots,
Cambo,
  " hotels at,
Campan,
Canine absurdity,
  " feat, a,
Canton, odours of,
Capercailzie,
Capvern,
  " baths of,
  " hotels at,
Carmelites, church of the (Bigorre),
Carnival time (Pau),
Cascade d'Arroudet,
  " de Cerizey,
  " du Coeur,
  " de Discoo,
  " des Eaux Bonnes,
  " d'Enfer,
  " du Groshetre,
  " de Laressec,
  " de Lassariou,
  " du Lutour,
  " du Marbore,
  " de Montauban,
  " de Pisse-Arros,
  " de Rioumaou,
  " du Serpent,
  " de Sidonie,
  " du Valentin,
Casino (Luchon),
  " (Pau),
  " du Portillon (Luchon),
  " de Roulette (Luchon),
Castel-Geloos,
Castel-Mouly,
Castel-Vieilh (or Castelvieil)
Castets,
Catarabe,
Cat-fight,
Cauterets,
  " baths of,
  " excursions from,
  " Fruitiere of,
  " Gorge of,
  " hotels of,
Cazaril,
Cazaux,
Cecire (Bosost),
 " (Superbagneres),
Cemetery, Luz,
 " Pau,
Cercle des Etrangers (Bareges),
Cerizey, cascade of,
Chambre d'Amour (inn),
Chamois,
Chandelles du Marbore,
Chaos, the,
Chapelle de Pietad,
  " de St. Antoine,
  " de St. Exupere,
  " de St. Roch,
  " de Solferino,
Chateau de Beaucens,
  " de Despourrins,
  " de Geloz,
  " de Miramont,
  " de Ste. Marie,
Chester, resemblance to,
Cheval, Madame,
Chinaougue,
Church of Montauban,
  " Notre Dame, Arreau,
  " Notre Dame, Lourdes,
  " Pietat,
  " St. Jacques, Pau,
  " St. Martin, Pau,
  " St. Savin, Argeles,
  " St. Vincent, Bigorre,
  " Sazos,
  " Soulom,
Chute de Lapaca,
  " la Pique,
Cier de Luchon,
Cierp,
Cirque de Gavarnie,
  " Troumouse,
Clerical sensation,
Coarraze,
Coffre d'Ossau,
Col d'Arbeousse,
  " d'Aspin,
  " d'Aubiste,
  " de Bue
  " d'Estom Soubiran,
  " de Gourzy,
  " de Marie Blanque,
  " de Peyresourde,
  " de Portillon,
  " de Riou,
  " de Tortes,
  " de Tourmalet,
Columbine (_aquilegia_),
Confirmation at Cauterets,
Coteaux, the (Pau),
Cottin, Madame,
Coumelie (mountain),
Couradilles, the,
Coustous, the,
  " music on the,
Cowslips,
Crabe (bridge),
Crabioules, glacier of,
Crere d'Ordincede,
"Crocodile of St. Bertrand," the,
Croix de Manse,
  " de Mouguere,
"Cry of the Lourdes Shopkeepers," the,
Cucurlon rock (Biarritz),
Cylindre (du Marbore),

D.

Dax,
  " baths of,
  " hotels at,
Daffodils,
Dangerous footing,
Dear travelling,
Dog-fancier, an excited,
Dragon's-mouth Rock,

E.

Eaux Bonnes, 178;
  " bathing establishment of,
  " cascade of,
  " excursions from,
Eaux Bonnes, hotels at,
Eaux Chaudes,
  baths at,
  excursions from,
  grotto of,
  hotels at,
Echez, basin of,
Echo, wonderful,
English Church (Bigorre),
Entecade, peak,
Espelette,
Esplanade des Oeufs,
Esquiez,
Esterre,
"Exhortation to the First Snow,"

F.

Fashion on a donkey,
Fausse Breche (Gavarnie),
Feather moss,
Females, importunate,
Fete de Payole,
Flight of lizards,
Fontaine de Marnieres (Pau)
Fos,
French sportsmen (Pau),
Fuenterabia (_Fr_. Fontarabie),

G.

Gabas,
Gabrielle d'Estrelle,
Gan,
Garin,
Garonne, river,
  valley of,
Gavarnie,
  Cirque of,
  hotels of,
  Port de,
Gave d'Azun,
Gave de Bareges,
Gave de Bastan,
  Cauterets,
  Gavarnie,
  Heas,
  Lutour,
  Marcadau,
  d'Ossau,
  de Pau,
Gazost-les-Bains,
Gedre,
  excursions from,
  grotto of,
Geloos, Castel
Gelos,
General information, Appendix D,
Gentians,
Gerde,
Geruzet's marble works,
Ges,
Glacier de Crabioules,
Gorge de Bacheviron,
  Cauterets,
  du Hourat,
Gouffre d'Enfer,
Granges de Gouron,
Grange de la Reine Hortense,
Gripp,
Grocer's opinion, the (Cauterets),
Grotto of Eaux Chaudes,
  Gedre,
  Lourdes,
  the Neez,
Grust (St. Sauveur),
Guetary,
"Guide's Auction," the,

H.

Heas,
  inn, &c.,
  valley of,
Hendaye,
Hepaticas,
Hermitage of St. Peter (St. Sauveur),
Herrere, stream,
Hospice Civil (Bigorre)
  "    de France (Luchon)
  "    de Ste. Eugenie (Bareges)
Hotel d'Angleterre, Argeles
  "    Baudot, Eaux Chaudes
  "    Beau Sejour (Bigorre)
  "    Canton, Luchon
  "    de Comminges
  "    d'Espana, Bosost
  "    de France, Argeles
  "       "     Arreau
  "       "     Eaux Bonnes
  "       "     St. Sauveur
  "    du Parc, Cauterets
  "    de Paris, Biarritz
  "    de la Poste, Payole
  "       "     Pierrefitte
  "    des Pyrenees, Lourdes
  "       "     Louvie-Juzon
  "    de l'Univers, Luz
  "    des Voyageurs, Gavarnie
Houn Blanquo
Hourat, Gorge de
Hungry guardian, a
Hyacinths

I.

"Idyllic Colbert" (Pau)
Importunate females
Irun
Itsatsou
Izeste

J.

Jaca, a
"Jackdaw's Causerie"
Jardin a l'Anglaise (St. Sauveur)
  "     Darralde
  "     des Quinconces
"Jay of Bareges," the
"Jeannette's Lamb,"
Jonquils
Jurancon

L.

Labassere, a
  waters of (see Bagneres de Bigorre)
La Brune (Cauterets)
La Casque du Marbore
Lac Bleu
  "  d'Estibaoute
  "  d'Estom
  "  d'Estom Soubiran
  "  de Gaube
  "  Vert
"Lady's Farewell to her Asinine Steed," the
Lagas, fountain of
Lamothe
Lapaca, Chute de
Laressec, cascade of,
Laruns
  church of
  inns at
Lassariou, cascade of
La Tour du Marbore
Les
Lescar
"Lesson of the Mountains," the
Lime-works (Eaux Bonnes)
_Linaria_
Liverpool to Bordeaux
Lizards, flight of
Llanberis Pass, resemblance to
London to Bordeaux
London to Paris
Louderville
Lourdes to Argeles
   "       Bareges
   "       Cauterets
   "       Gavarnie
   "       Luz
Lourdes to Pierrefitte,
  St. Sauveur,
Lourdes,
  castle of,
  chapel of,
  church of,
  grotto of,
  hotels at,
  panorama of,
Loures,
  inns of,
Louron, valley of,
Louvie-la-Haute,
Louvie-Juzon,
Louvie-Soubiron,
Luchon (see Bagneres de Luchon)
Lunch on the Bergons,
Lutour, cascade of,
  valley of,
Luz,
  hotels at,
  baths of,
Lys, valley of,

M.

Marble Works, Geruzet's,
Marbore, the,
  Cascade du,
  Chandelles du,
  Epaule du,
  La Casque du,
  La Tour du,
"March of the Men of Garlic," the,
Marignac,
Marion, Lake,
Marnieres, Fontaine de,
Maucapera,
Mauleon-Barousse,
  Licharre,
Mediabat, bridge of,
Menu (Cauterets),
  (Payole),
Mill conduits,
Milord, a,
Minvieille, Buvette de,
Molitg,
  baths of, &c.,
  excursions from,
  hotels at,
Monne, Bigorre,
  Cauterets,
  Rouge,
Montagne de Brada,
Mont Arrouye,
Montaigu, Pic de (see Pic)
Montauban,
  church of,
  cascade of,
Mont Bedat,
  Ferrat,
Montgaillard,
Montrejeau,
  buffet of,
Mont Segu, Bosost,
Morcenx,
Mouguere (cross of),
Mountain rhododendrons,
  violets,
Mouriscot, Lake,
Museum (Luchon),
  (Luz),

N.

Napoleon's pillar (St. Sauveur),
Narcissus,
Nature's voice,
Nay,
Neez, grotto of the,
  stream,
  valley of,
Negresse (station),
Nestalas,
Neste (river),
Nethou, Pic de,
New "diet of worms," a,
Nivelle (river),
Noah's ark landscape, a,

O.

"Old world and the new," the (Pau),
Oloron,
  general information,
  hotels at,
  roads to,
Oo,
Open-air concert,
Ordincede, Crete d',
Orphanage of Notre Dame du Rocher (Luchon),
Orphanage, church of,
Orpheon, the,
Orthez,
Osmunda regalis (fern),
Ossau, Gave d',
  Val d',
Ourous,
"Oxen's Appeal," the,
Oxslips,

P.

Paillole (see Payole)
Pagoda Villa, the (Cauterets),
Palais de Justice, Pau,
Palomieres de Gerde,
Panorama of Lourdes,
Panticosa,
  hotels at,
Parc Beaumont, Pau,
  du Chateau, Pau,
Paris to Bagneres de Bigorre,
Paris to Bordeaux,
Paris to Toulouse,
Pasages,
Pas de l'Echelle,
Pas de l'Escalette,
Pas de Roland,
Pau to Eaux Bonnes and Chaudes,
Pau to Lourdes,
Pau to Oloron,
Pau, I,
  amusements at,
  castle of,
  drives, &c., at,
  general information,
  history of,
  hotels of,
Payole,
  en fete, 136
Peasants and their ways,
Peculiar teams,
Peguere, the,
Pena Blanca,
Pene de l'Heris,
Pene de Montarque,
Perpignan,
Perpignan to Amelie,
Perpignan to Molitg,
Perpignan to Vernet,
Perpignan,
  chief excursions from,
  hotels at,
Peyrehorade,
Peyresourde, Col de,
Pic d'Antenac,
Pic d'Arbizon,
Pic d'Ardiden,
Pic d'Arrens,
Pic d'Aspe,
Pic d'Astazou,
Pic d'Aubiste,
Pic d'Ayre,
Pic de Bergons,
Pic de Boum,
Pic de Bugaret,
Pic de Campbieil,
Pic de Clarabide,
Pic de Crabioules,
Pic de Gabietou,
Pic de Gabizos,
Pic de Gar,
Pic de Gaube,
Pic de Ger,
Pic de Gourzy,
Pic de Labassa,
Pic du Lac Grand,
Pic de Laruns
  de Lienz
  de Litouese
  de Maladetta
  de Maucapera
  du Midi d'Arrens (see Pic
    d'Arrens)
  du Midi de Bigorre
  du Midi d'Ossau
  du Milieu
  de la Mine
  de Montaigu (near Bigorre)
  de Montaigu (near Saint
    Sauveur)
  de Neouville
  de Nere
  de Nethou
  Rouge de Pailla
  de Pez
  de la Pique
  de Posets
  Poujastou
  Sacroux
  de Sarradets
  de Sauvegarde
  de Soulom
  de Villelongue
  de Viscos
Picnicking (Pau)
Pie de Mars
Pierrefitte;
  hotels at,
  road to
Pietat
Pilgrims
Pimene, the
Pique, valley of
Pitton de Tournefort
Place Royale, Pau
  Ste. Eugenie, Biarritz
  "Plaint of the Weather-beaten Pine,"
Plateau of the Bious-Artigues
Poc (guide)
_Polygala amara_
_Polygala rosea_
Pont d'Arrouge
  de Benques
  de Crabe
  de Desdouroucat
  d'Enfer (near Eaux Chaudes)
  d'Enfer (near Luz)
  d'Espagne
  de la Hiladere
  de Lestelle
  de Nadie
  Napoleon
  de Pescadere
  de Ravi
  de Sia
  de Villelongue
"Poor Pillicoddy,"
Port de Gavarnie
  de Peyresourde (see Col de)
  de la Picade
  de Venasque
Posets, the Peak
Post-office (Luz)
_Potentilla_
Pragneres
Preste-les-Bains;
  baths and hotels of,
_Primula farinosa_
Promenade Horizontale (Bareges)
  de l'Imperatrice
Puyoo
Pyramide de Peyrelance
Pyrenean dogs
  prices of
  treatment of
  local terms translated,
    some,
  songs

Q.

Quairat, Pic
Quatre Moulins de Sia

R.

Railway information and skeleton routes to the Pyrenees,
_Ramondia pyrenaica_
Ravin d'Araille
Rebenac
Red tape
"Riou,"
Rioumaou, cascade of
"Roads up again,"
Rocks at Biarritz
Rue d'Enfer (Luchon)
 " de la Fontaine (Pau)

S.

Saint Antoine, chapel of Aventin
 "  Beat
 "  Bernard, statue of
 "  Bertrand de Comminges to Montrejeau
 "  Bertrand de Comminges,
 "        "       "         "           cathedral of
 "        "       "         "           cloisters of
 "        "       "         "           history of
St. Christau,
 "        "         hotels at
 "   Etienne
   Jacques Church (Pau)
 " Jean de Luz
 "   "    dogs of
 "   "    general information
 "  Laurent de la Salanque
 "  Mamet
 "      "       church of
 "  Martin's Church (Pau)
 "  Pe
 "  Pee
 "  Peter's statue (Lourdes)
 "  Pierre
St. Sauveur
 "       "       baths of
 "       "       excursions from
 "       "       hotels at
 "  Savin
 "  Vincent's Church (Bigorre)
Ste. Marie (near Bigorre)
  "             (near Oloron)
  "             (near St. Laurent)
  "             (near Salechan)
  "             baths of
Sakurazawa, memories of
Salies
Salechan
Salluz (Argeles)
Salut, avenue of
San Sebastian
           "           chief features of,
           "           hotels at
Sarsaparilla
Sassis (St. Sauveur)
Sazos (St. Sauveur)
_Scabii_
Sere (Luz)
Serres
Sevignac
Sia
  "   bridge of
  "   Quatre Moulins de
Sidonie, cascade of
Silver beeches
Siradan
    "       valley of
Skeleton routes and railway information
Sketching advice
              "           with a donkey-cart
Snow
Some Pyrenean local terms translated
Songs, Pyrenean
Soulom
Soulom, Pic de
Soum de Secugnac
Sour grapes (Pau)
Sourde, valley of
Spanish mules and peasants
Sport, French
"Spring's Bitters and Sweets"
Sugar-loaf Mountain (Gavarnie)
Superbagneres
  view from
Swine-feeding

T.

Tables of centigrade and Fahrenheit thermometers
  of centimetres and inches
  of grammes and ounces
  of kilometres and miles
  of litres and pints
  of metres and feet
Taillon, the
Tapere (stream)
Tarbes
  road
Templars' church at Luz
"The Abbe's Song"
"The Argeles Shepherd's Reply"
The Bishop's arrival
The Chaos
"The Crocodile of St. Bertrand"
The Couradilles
"The Guide's Auction"
"The Jackdaw's Causerie"
"The Jay of Bareges"
"The Lady's Farewell to her Asinine Steed"
"The Lesson of the Mountains"
"The March of the Men of Garlic"
"The Organ's Tale"
"The Oxen's Appeal"
"The Plaint of the Weather-beaten Pine"
"The Three Cormorants"
The "witch of the hills"
"Three Cormorants," the
Torrent of Bugaret
Toulouse to Perpignan
  road to
Tour des Lacs (Biarritz)
Tour de la Monnaie (Pau)
Tourmalet, Col de
Trained vines
Tramesaigues
Travellers' troubles
Troumouse, Cirque of
Trous d'Enfer
Tuc de Maupas

U.

Urrugne
Ustaritz

V.

Valcabrere
Val d'Ossau
Valentin (river)
Vallee d'Aran
  d'Arboust
  d'Argeles
  d'Aspe
  d'Aure
  de Bareges
  de Barousse
  de Broussette
  de Campan
  de Garonne
  de Heas
  de l'Hospice
  de Lesponne
  de Lienz
  de Louron
  de Luchon
    history of
Vallee du Lutour
  de Luz
  du Lys
  de Marcadau
  du Neez
  de la Pique
  de Seoube
  de Serris
  de Siradan
  de Sourde (or Soude)
Valley of the Ten Thousand
  Rocks (Amoy)
Venasque
  Port de
Vernet-les-Bains
  baths of
  excursions from
  hotels at
Via Crucis (Betharram)
Viella (near Bareges)
  (near St. Beat)
Vieuzac
Vignemale, Pic de
Villelongue
  Pic de
Villenave
Vines trained by the roadside
Violets

W.

Washerwomen and their gamps
Wonderful echo
Wood anemones

Y.

Yankee tale, a

Z.

Zinc mines



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWIXT FRANCE AND SPAIN***


******* This file should be named 10403.txt or 10403.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/4/0/10403


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
